UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
RECONNAISSANCE GEOLOGY AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS OF SELECTED AREAS OF THE SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA CONTINENTAL BORDERLAND
by S.H. Clarke, H.G. Greene, M.E. Field/ and
W.H.K. Lee
OPEN-FILE REPORT 83 - 62
This report is preliminary and has not been reviewed for conformity with U.S. Geological Survey editorial standards and stratigraphic nomenclature. Any use of trade names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the USGS.
Menlo Park, California

CONTENTS
Introduction Geographic and Geological Setting

Page 1
-1

Previous Investigations Acknowledgments

2 3

Procedures and Methods

3

Methods of Interpretation Gulf of Santa Catalina and Adjacent Shelf
Introduction

4 7 7

Geologic Structure Seismicity Tsunamis Seafloor Instability

10 13 16 17

Hydrocarbon Seepage and Shallow Gas Accumulations Sediment Thickness and Character

22 24

Summary of Hazards

26

Central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge

29

Introduction

29

Geologic Structure Seismic Hazards Seafloor Instability

31 33 35

Hydrocarbon Seepage and Shallow Gas Accumulations Sediment Character and Thickness

37 38

Summary of Hazards

40

Western Santa Barbara Channel - Point Conception Region Introduction

- 41 41

Seismic Interpretations Geologic Structure Seismicity

CONTE JTS cont'd.

Seafloor Instability

Hydrocarbon Seepage and Shallow Gas Accumulations Bedrock Geology -

Summary of Hazards

-

References Cited

Appendix 1. Location, Depth, Length and Type of Selected Samples from the southern California Continental Borderland -

List of Figures 1. Location Map, Gulf of Santa Catalina and Adjacent Area

2. Location Hap, Central Santa Rosa Cortes Ridge Area

3. Location Map, Western Santa Barbara Channel - Point Conception Area

4. Interpreted Seismic Reflection Profile (line 131, S2-78-SC)

5. Interpreted Seismic Reflection Profile (line 114, S2-78-SC)

44 49 53 56 59 59 61 62
71
-8
30
42 45
46

11

LIST OF PLATES
Plate 1. Index map of continental borderland of southern California. 2. Geophysical trackline map of the Gulf of S ^a Catalina area. 3. Sample locations and ages, Gulf of Santa Catalina area, California 4. Structure and seismicity map of the Gulf of Santa Catalina area. 5. Surficial geologic map of the Gulf of Santa Catalina and adjacent area, California. 6. Isopach map of acoustically transparent sediment in the Gulf of Santa Catalina area, California. 7. Geophysical trackline map of the San Nicolas Island area. 8. Bedrock geology of the central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge (from Vedder and others, 1974). 9. Preliminary structure map central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge.
10. Earthquake epicenters Jan. 1, 1932 to Sept. 30, 1979, central Santa RosaCortes Ridge.
11. Seafloor instability, erosion and transport, central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge.
12. Offshore surficial geology, central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge. 13. Grain-size and percent calcium carbonate and organic carbon in surface
sediments central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge. 14. Geophysical trackline map of the Point Conception area. 15. Geologic map of the Point Conception area, California. 16. Surficial geologic and morphologic map of the Point Conception area,
California. 17. Isopach map of acoustically transparent sediment in the Point Conception
area, California. 18. Fault and seismicity map of the Point Conception area, California.
111

RECONNAISSANCE GEOLOGY AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS OF SELECTED AREAS OF THE SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA CONTINENTAL BORDERLAND
INTRODUCTION Accelerated exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons in the southern California continental borderland have necessitated the consideration of potential geoenvironmental hazards in the vicinity of lease tracts. This report addresses geological hazards present in and around some lease sale blocks that were initially considered for inclusion in OCS lease sale #48. Three areas were studied, the Gulf of Santa Catalina, the northern part of the santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge, and the westernmost Santa Barbara Channel just offshore from Point Conception (pi. 1). These areas are significant because they lie in close proximity to highly populated urban centers, (2) near sites or potential sites of critical industries onshore, or (3) adjoin or overlap areas previously surveyed by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) for the geological environmental appraisal for lease sale #35. Geological environmental assessments undertaken in other parts of the southern California borderland by the USGS in conjunction with offshore leasing activities are reported by Greene and others (1975).
Geographic and Geological Setting The term southern California Continental Borderland here refers to the
region extending from Point Arguello on the north to the U.S.-Mexican border on the south, and from the California coastline westward approximately 250 km to the Patton Escarpment (pi. 1; Shepard and Emery, 1941). This report is concerned with the environmental geology of parts of three areas within the borderland that include most of the tracts proposed for leasing in OCS sale 48. The geologic framework of the entire

southern California continental borderland is described in recent studies by Vedder and others (1974; 1980).
Previous Investigations Since 1975, the USGS has studied the geological environment of the
southern California continental borderland and assessed, on a regional scale, geologic hazards pertinent to petroleum development on the OCS. Although much geologic and oceanographic work was done in this region prior to 1975, few of these studies were directed at environmental geologic problems. Some significant investigations that focus on geological hazards are noted below.
The first thorough investigation of onshore and offshore faulting in southern California was carried out by Gutenberg (1943); a study of offshore seismic events by Clements and Emery (1947) provided additional details concerning the regional geologic structure. D. G. Moore's (1960) study of the shear strength and depositional patterns of sediments in the borderland gave indications as to how the region would react to active faulting. Known and postulated faults, both offshore and onshore, have been compiled by Jennings (1973, 1977). A geologic reconstruction of part of the borderland by Howell and others (1974) implies that strike-slip faulting is dominant. Evaluation of seismic activity in the borderland led Vedder and others (1974) to the conclusion that fault location and movement may be much more complex than was thought by earlier workers. Recent detailed studies of faulting in selected areas of the borderland indeed indicate that the pattern of faulting is complex and appears to result from wrench-fault tectonics (Greene and others, 1975; 1979; Yerkes and others, 1980).
In their study of the origin of petroleum, Emery and Rittenberg (1952) examined sediments from twelve borderland basins to determine their

composition, age and metu 'd of deposition, and the presence of hydrocarbons. Orr and Emery (1956) contributed additional knowledge concerning the origin and distribution of hydrocarbons in borderland basins. Emery and Hoggan (1958) discussed the types of gases occurring in oil-bearing regions, and compared them to types found in several borderland basins. Naturally occurring oil and gas seeps in the southern California offshore region were described by Wilkinson (1971). Mikolaj and others (1972) subsequently extended and refined this work in their study of offshore oil seeps.
Acknowledgments The scientists principally responsible for geological investigations and
reports concerning the three areas studied are: Gulf of Santa Catalina S.H. Clarke and H.G. Greene; central Santa Rosa - Cortes Ridge - M.E. Field; Point Conception area - K.G. Greene. W.H.K. Lee contributed seismicity information in all three areas. Many colleagues in the USGS have helped collect and interpret data used in this report; special thanks go to Robert Arnal, Paula Quinterno, Keith Kvenvolden, John Vedder, Kimberly Bailey, William Richmond, Carol Hirozawa, Kevin Heston, Michael White, and to Michael Kennedy of the California Division of Mines and Geology. The report was improved by the review comments of Brian D. Edwards. Our thanks also go to Maryjane Kibbee, who typed the manuscript. Collection and interpretation of marine geological and geophysical data for this study was funded in part by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) under the BLM-USGS Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) AA551-MU8-15.
Procedures and Methods Much of the material presented in this report is based on the

interpretation of seismic reflection records collected aboard the R/V SEA SOUNDER during 1978 and 1979 (cruises S2-78-SC and S2-79-SC). Both highresolution profiles gathered with 3.5 kHz and Uniboom systems and intermediate to deep-penetration profiles gathered with a 160 kJ sparker system were used. Subsurface features ranging upward in size from approximately 0.3 m to 1.5 m could be resolved on high resolution reflection records that varied in subbottoin penetration from 150 m to over 400 m. The deep-penetration records used to determine deep structure can resolve features larger than about 15 m in size and commonly record geologic structure at depths of well over a kilometer in deep sedimentary basins. Ship positioning employed a range-range MiniRanger system during approximately 80 percent of time; this system was augmented or replaced by ship's radar during the remainder of these cruises. Location accuracy of the seismic data ranges from about 15 m, to about 500 m where ship's radar alone was used.
Methods of Interpretation Standard interpretive methods were used in the analysis of the seismic
reflection data. For a description of basic seismic reflection techniques, the interested reader is referred to Moore (1960) and Payton (1977). Criteria for the interpretation of faults are as follows (after Greene and others, 1973): Well defined faults: (1) distinct displacement of prominent reflectors/ (2) a sharp discontinuation of prominent reflectors, or the juxtaposition of prominent reflectors with an interval having contrasting seismic characteristics, or (3) an abrupt change in the dips of reflectors across a distinct boundary. Inferred faults: (1) small displacement of prominent reflectors, in which the upper or shallow reflectors may be bent

rather than broken, (2) prominent reflectors are discontinuous and contrasting seismic characteristics are present on either side of an obscure, seismically disturbed zone, or (3) apparent changes in dip on either side of the seismically disturbed zone. Questionable faults are mapped where obscure interruptions of seismic reflectors occur in the subsurface. Such interruptions consist of (1) a shift in phase of reflectors that is not due to instrumental malfunction, (2) bent or broken reflectors that can be correlated with known faults on other lines, (3) discontinuation of weak reflectors, or (4) any other zone of seismic contrast, especially where the zone appears similar to and aligned with faults identified on adjacent lines. Some questionable and inferred faults have been mapped where anomalous topographic lineaments appear to support the continuation of known faults. Subaqueous slides are mapped on the basis of the characteristics described above and on the presence of other criteria such as hummocky surfaces associated with sharply defined, steeply dipping slopes, contorted stratification, reflections thought to indicate internal shear planes or basal shear surfaces, and backrotated reflections.
Gas in sediments is suggested on medium and high resolution seismic reflection records by the presence of amplitude anomalies (apparent as enhanced or "bright" reflectors); the sharp termination or displacement of reflectors, commonly associated with acoustically turbid zones; the absence of surface multiples indicating absorption of the seismic signal (Nelson and others, 1978); and the presence of "pull-downs" from the decreased velocity of sound in gaseous sediments. Water column anomalies on high resolution seismic records in some cases suggest bubbles in the water column, although other phenomena such as kelp and fish produce similar appearing features. Side-scan

sonographs and underwater video or photographic coverage may show seep mounds or craters on the sea floor, and bubbles. Several lines of geophysical evidence are desireable, and in all cases sampling and geochemical analyses are needed to verify the presence of gas and identify its origin.
c
The orientation of faults is determined princip<. / by correlation from one seismic line to another. Faults are correlated between adjacent lines mainly on the basis of their association with similar structural and seismic features on adjacent profiles. Such features typically include reflectors which are similar and are displaced in the same direction, with similar drag or other subsidiary folding, and contrasts in seismic characteristics across a fault that are similar on adjacent lines. Faults that cannot be correlated from one line to the next are drawn parallel to nearby (within about 2 km) faults that have been correlated between two or more adjacent lines.
Where fault planes dip more than about 35°, the vertical exaggeration common to seismic records precludes determining the dip even though the records clearly indicate that a fault is present. Consequently, faults dipping 35° or more are drawn as vertical. Determination of the amount and direction of movement on a fault is very difficult. Only the apparent vertical component (vertical separation) of offset can be measured on the seismic reflection profiles; the horizontal component (strike-slip separation) is almost impossible to determine.
The upper limit of a fault can be calculated from seismic records by multiplying the assumed velocity through the sediments by half of the two-way seismic travel time obtained at the shallowest (stratigraphically highest and youngest) subsurface reflector cut by the fault. Generally the stratigraphically highest point at which a fault can be identified in a seismic

reflection profile is at the base of the "bubble pulse".!/ , about 6 m beneath the ocean floor on high-resolution records and about 60 m below the floor on intermediate-penetration records. An exception is where the sea floor is actually displaced by the fault.
GULF OF SANTA CATALINA AND ADJACENT SHELF by S.H. Clarke and H.G. Greene
Introduction This area comprises the offshore region extending from the latitude of
Long Beach southward to that of San Diego, and from the shoreline seaward an average distance of about 36 km (fig. 1). The mainland shelf is the major physiographic feature in the eastern part of the study area. The shelf may be subdivided, for convenience, into three parts: a relatively broad (10-20 km wide) segment, here referred to as the San Pedro shelf, between the Palos Verdes Hills and Newport Beach, a narrow (3-9 km wide) segment between Newport Beach and Point La Jolla, and a relatively wide (f 7-17 km wide) segment, here referred to as the San Diego shelf, between Point La Jolla and the U.S.Mexican border. The break in slope marking the shelf edge is as shallow as 75 m in the northern part of the area off the Palos Verdes Hills and locally along the San Pedro shelf, but characteristically occurs within the depth range from about 90 m to 125 m over the remainder of this region. Water depths over the entire area studied range from approximately 20-30 m along the
TL/ A bubble-pulse consists of attenuating reverberations that linger in the water column after the primary pulse has been produced. These reverberations are reflected back from the ocean bottom and appear as psuedo-seafloor traces on the seismic record, effectively masking any signals reflected from shallow structures immediately beneath the sea floor. 7 A/t> H«<- o

inner shelves to a maximum of about 1250 m in the San Diego Trough west of Coronado Bank.
Prominent submarine canyons cutting the San Pedro shelf include the San Pedro Sea Valley, which empties westward into the San Pedro Basin, and the San Gabriel and Newport Canyon systems, which cut the southern margin of the shelf and drain southward into the Gulf of Santa Catalina. The latter canyon system forms the physiographic boundary between the San Pedro shelf and the narrow shelf segment south of Newport Beach. Carlsbad Canyon heads on the inner shelf approximately 7 km south of Oceanside and extends westward into the Gulf of Santa Catalina. Farther south, La Jolla Canyon and its tributary, Scripps Canyon, cut the shelf north of Point La Jolla, forming the northern boundary of the San Diego shelf segment. They then flow westward into the Gulf of Santa Catalina. The mainland shelf off San Diego is cut by a major northwesttrending valley, Loma Sea Valley. To the west lies a northwest-trending submarine basement ridge, Coronado Bank, that rises to depths as shallow as 97 m. Coronado Canyon heads on the outer shelf about 25 km southwest of San Diego and empties southwestward into the San Diego Trough, delimiting Coronado Bank on the south.
The Gulf of Santa Catalina is bounded on the west by prominent bedrock ridges comprising the emergent Santa Catalina Island platform and Thirtymile Bank, which rises over 850 m above the floor of the adjacent San Diego Trough. Several prominent bedrock knolls, e.g., Lasuen Knoll, rise as much as 420 m above the sea floor in the northern half of the Gulf of Santa Catalina.
Data used in this study were collected during the May-June, 1978 cruise of the R/V SEA SOUNDER (S2-78-SC; pi. 2). A preliminary map depicting the overall geologic structure of this area was prepared from intermediatepenetration, low-resolution single channel sparker data. Subsequently,
9

shallow-penetration, high-resolution boomer and sparker records were used to prepare maps showing shallow structure and faults/ bedrock outcrops/ areas of active sediment transport and potential seafloor instability/ hydrocarbon seeps and gas anomalies/ and unconsolidated sediment distribution and thickness. Geophysical data collected during the 1979 cruise of the R/V SEA SOUNDER (S2-79-SC; pi. 2) were used to fill data voids and to aid in the correlation of major structures and geologic contacts. Forty-five dart and gravity cores collected during the 1978 cruise and selected samples from the 1979 cruise were used to provide geologic age information for interpretation of geophysical records/ and a limited amount of textural date (pi. 3). Core type/ location/ water depth and recovery results at selected sampling stations are listed in Appendix 1.
Geologic Structure The predominant structural grain within the Gulf of Santa Catalina and
San Diego Trough has a northwest trend (pi. 4). Two major fault zones within these areas bound a relatively undeformed structural block/ named the Catalina block by Greene and others (1979). The Newport-Inglewood-Rose Canyon fault zone forms the northeast boundary of this block, and the Palos Verdes HillsCoronado Bank fault zone forms the southwest boundary. Both of these fault zones are composed of discontinuous/ generally right-stepping/ en echelon faults and associated folds (pi. 4). Wo single fault within either zone appears to continue uninterrupted for more than 40 km. This pattern resembles other fault zones of California/ onshore and offshore/ which are composed of short/ en echelon faults in relatively narrow (1 to 10 km wide) zones.
The Newport-Inglewood-Rose Canyon fault zone/ which extends offshore at Newport Beach/ appears to have influenced the development of the eastern slope
10

of the Gulf of Santa Catalina physiographic basin. The zone is defined at the surface by discontinuous, generally northwest-trending faults and folds within Tertiary and Quaternary strata (pi. 4); these structural features form a discrete belt that extends for at least 240 km from near the Santa Monica Mountains into Baja California. To the south, near Oceanside, the faults of this zone step to the west and continue southward to La Jolla. Continuation of this fault zone is proposed by Legg and Kennedy (1979), who connect the Rose Canyon fault zone with the Vallecitos-San Miguel fault zone in Mexico. Onshore and northwest of Newport Beach, the fault zone extends northward across the western Los Angeles Basin and appears to terminate abruptly at the Santa Monica fault (Barrows, 1974; Ziony and others, 1974; Jennings, 1977). Moody and Hill (1956) and Harding (1973) postulate a right-slip wrench tectonic model for the Newport-Inglewood fault zone in the Los Angeles Basin. Apparent offsets and en echelon folds suggesting this same sense of motion have been noted by us offshore along the southern extension of the zone, e.g., Scripps submarine canyon appears to be a right-laterally offset head of La Jolla submarine canyon. The inner, north-trending segment of La Jolla canyon also is fault-controlled; it probably was formed by erosion along a shear zone created by notion along the Rose Canyon fault.
The Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Bank fault zone extends from Santa Monica to Loma Sea Valley and beyond (fig. 1; pi. 4). The segment of the fault zone near San Pedro forms the western margin of the Catalina block; here, it is well defined and continuous. Farther south it is discontinuous along the eastern edge of Lasuen Knoll; however, a strand of the fault zone steps westward, extending along the western edge of Lasuen Knoll. The Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Bank fault zone may be traced southward for 30 km or more to its intersection with a more north-trending fault about 25 km west of Point La
11

Jolla. From this intersection, the Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Bank fault zone continues southward as two parallel strands along the eastern edge of Coronado Bank. This fault zone is shown by Legg and Kennedy (1979) to continue south into Mexico, where it connects with the Agua Blanca fault zone. We suggest that the Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Bank fault zone has exerted structural control on the development of Loma Sea Valley and the eastern slope of Coronado Bank during Quaternary time.
Another, shorter fault is mapped in the central part of the San Diego Trough (pi. 4). Legg and Kennedy (1979) have propose^ that this fault joins the San Pedro and Santa Catalina faults to the north, and the Thirtymile Bank and Maximinos faults to the south. If so, this fault zone is as long as those bounding the Catalina block and probably developed in a similar manner. This suggests the presence in the southern part of the study area of another structural block that is bounded on the east by the Palos Verdes HillsCoronado Bank fault zone and on the west by the San Pedro-San Diego TroughMaximinos fault zone.
The length, trend, and character of the three major offshore fault zones described above are comparable to the Wittier-Elsinore and San Jacinto fault zones onshore. Short, en echelon, second-order faults are associated with each major fault zone and commonly splay from the primary faults at angles ranging from 20 to 40 degrees. Second-order fold axes are similarly related to these fault zones. These structural relationships follow the stress pattern for wrench faulting described by Moody and Hill (1956) and Wilcox an<i others (1973), and suggest that the offshore fault zones may represent through-going, right-slip faults within the underlying basement rocks.
Major structural and physiographic features within and bounding the Catalina block are compatible with the wrench tectonic model. We suggest that
12

La Jolla Submarine Canyon/ for example/ is a graben formed as a result of tension associated with dilation within the Catalina block. Similarly/ Coronado Bank/ Point Loma/ and other banks and ridges within and adjacent to the Catalina block appear to be horsts produced by co ression. This horst and graben topography and the buried sedimentary bas- and ridges in the San Diego region may also express a structural history dominated by wrench tectonics (Michael P. Kennedy/ oral commun., 1978).
Seismicity The Gulf of Santa Catalina region has been seismically active throughout
historic time/ especially the northwestern part of the area in the vicinity of the San Pedro shelf and Palos Verdes Hills. The distribution of instrumentally recorded earthquakes is shown on Plate 4; the locations of these epicenters were provided by W.ii.K. Lee from instrumental data collected by the southern California seismographic network/ established in 1926 and now comprising 160 stations operated under the joint direction of the Seisirtological Laboratory of the California Institute of Technology and the U.S. Geological Survey. Location accuracy of epicenters offshore is estimated to be approximately 5 km (W.H.K. Lee/ 1980/ oral commun.).
Non-instrumentally recorded (felt) earthquakes in this region are catalogued by Townley and Alien (1939). The locations of most earthquakes recorded by the southern California network during the 40-year period between 1932 and 1972 have been compiled on a yearly basis by Hileman and others (1973); epicenter locations for 1973-1974 are reported by Friedman and others (1976). In addition/ an earthquake data file compiled from the California Institute of Technology and other sources for seismic events reported between
13

1900 and 1977 is maintained by the California Division of Mines and Geology (Real and others, 1978).
Epicenters located by the southern California network within the Gulf of Santa Catalina region between January, 1932 and September, 1979 show a random pattern, generally lacking clear associations with major faults or other structures (pi. 4). More than 400 shocks measuring M2 to M4 are plotted in the offshore area and over 200 are plotted in the onshore coastal area. Earthquakes measuring between M4 and 116 are recorded at more than 30 offshore locations and at over 25 onshore coastal locations. The larger events appear to be concentrated in the Palos Verdes Hills area, and many lie in the vicinity of the Newport-Inglewood fault zone. The only M6 or greater earthquake plotted on Plate 4 is the 1933 Long Beach earthquake (Barrows, 1974). In addition, several major shocks have occurred in the onshore and offshore southern California region. Major earthquakes (estimated or measured 117.0 and greater) in this region are described by Hileman (1979) as (1) an 1812 shock, probably located on the Elsinore or Newport-Inglewood fault zone, that severely damaged the Mission San Juan Capistrano, (2) an 1857 earthquake, probably located on the San Andreas fault, that affected the northern part of the study area, and (3) a 1940 earthquake of M7.1 that occurred in the Imperial Valley area (Coffman and von Hake, 1973).
San Diego and the adjacent region were affected by a "violent" earthquake centered in the San Diego area in 1862. In 1968 the region was shaken by the Borrego Mountain earthquake that had a magnitude of 6.5 and locally caused damage and generated tsunamis in the vicinity of San Diego (Legg and Agnew, 1979). Additionally, activity in northern Baja California on the VallecitosSan Miguel fault system in 1949 (M5.7) and 1956 (M6.8, and three aftershocks
14

of M>5 during the past 30 years) has been felt in the San Diego area (Kennedy, 1975). Damaging earthquakes of unknown intensity also affected the San Diego area in 1852, 1856, 1892, and 1894 (Agnew and others, 1979). Seismicity during 1932-1979 in the offshore San Diego area appears relatively low, with the principal coastal and offshore activity associated with the Coronado Bank fault zone and an unnamed fault located 5 km northeast and parallel to it.
The San Pedro shelf was affected by ten or more earthquakes of M<4 to M5-6 in 1933, and a similar number in 1934 (Hileman and others, 1973; Greene and others, 1975). Some of these epicenters are aligned near the offshore Palos Verdes Hills fault and some with the Newport-Inglewood zone. A strong earthquake, the Long Beach earthquake of 1933 (M6.3-6.6), centered along the Newport-Inglewood zone offshore from Newport, caused extensive damage in the Long Beach area and was felt as far south as San Diego. Between 1935 and 1941, one shock of M4 or greater, as well as several lesser shocks, occurred annually in the San Pedro shelf area. Activity from 1942-1951 involved several shocks per year, all of M<4, and the area was relatively quiet seismically from 1951 to 1962 (Greene and others, 1975). In 1963, eight earthquakes of M<4 and one M<5 were reported from the area of the San Pedro escarpment; a second cluster of events, some having magnitudes of 4 to 5, occurred here in 1967. Otherwise, the San Pedro shelf area has remained fairly quiet in recent times.
In summary, the distribution of the epicenters on Plate 4 indicates that the greatest seismic activity has taken place in the northern part of the Catalina block of Greene and others (1979). These events, along with geophysical evidence showing local displacement of the seafloor and Quaternary sediment, indicate that the Newport-Inglewood, Palos Verdes Hills and
15

ancillary faults are active in this area. Also, the relative concentration of epicenters along faults that displace the sea floor in the San Diego Trough and within the southern half of the Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Banks fault zone reflect active faulting in these areas as well. The central part of the Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Banks fault zone appears relatively "quiet" seismically, suggesting that these faults may be locked along part of their extent. Although no fault-generated earthquake is known to have created hazardous conditions in the offshore Gulf of Santa Catalina region, any assessment of geological hazards to development should take into account the continuing seismic activity related to known faults, as well as the possibility of damage resulting from a large earthquake in an adjacent area. The effects, other than ground motion, of earthquakes in this region may include seafloor mass movement, sediment flowage, liquefaction, differential subsidence and tsunamis.
Tsunamis Damage from tsunamis has not been extensive in the southern California
coastal region, although shallow flooding of lowland areas and minor damage to small boat moorings, wharfs and similar coastal facilities has occurred. The greatest single tidal excursion of sea level (1 to 1.5 m) related to tsunami activity took place on May 22, 1960, and resulted fron tsunamis associated with a M8.5 earthquake in Chile (Van Dorn, 1979). At lease 19 tsunamis have been recorded instrumentally during the periods from 1854 to 1872 and from 1906 to 1979 in the San Diego area (Agnew, 1979). The five largest tsunamis recorded during this period are listed below chronologically with their point of origin (van Dorn, 1979):
16

1) April 1, 1946 - Aleutians 2) November 2, 1952 - Kamchatka 3) July 1, 1956 - Aleutians 4) May 22/ 1960 - Chile (most severe) 5) March 28, 1964 - Alaska Seven other tsunamis have been observed in the San Diego area since 1854, but none of these caused severe damage (Agnew/ 1979). However, several major faults in the offshore Gulf of Santa Catalina region show substantial apparent vertical offset, and the possibility of tsunamis resulting from seismic activity along these faults should be considered in hazards mitigation studies. Seafloor Instability Seafloor instability here refers to conditions that could lead to seafloor failure fron mass movement and liquefaction. Unstable and potentially unstable seafloor conditions identified in the Gulf of Santa Catalina region are associated wit1! subaqueous slides, subaqueous mass flows (including sediment creep), possibly with Quaternary channel fill and levee deposits and, to a limited extent, with possible accumulations of shallow gas. Additional information concerning instability in the coastal area adjacent to the Gulf of Santa Catalina and the engineering properties of geologic units exposed in this region is contained in reports by Blanc and Cleveland (1968), Wentworth and others (1970), Morton and others (1973, 1974), Morton (1974), Edgington (1974), Miller and Tan (1976), Tan and Edgington (1976), and Kennedy and others (1977). Subaqueous slides are mass movements of rigid or semi-consolidated sediment masses along discrete shear surfaces, with relatively little internal
17

deformation (Dott, 1963). Slides are commonly identified on seismic reflection records by the presence (in longitudinal sections) of some or all of the following characteristics: 1) a headscarp where the slip surface extend upward to the floor, 2) compressional ridges resulting from small-scale thrusting and folding at the toe of the slide, 3) transverse (tensional) cracks in the body of the slide, 4) evidence of rotation or limited internal deformation of reflectors, and 5) the presence of a slip surface, which may be concave upward or planar, represented by a discrete failure plane or by an intensely deformed zone beneath the slide mass. The term slump is commonly applied to a slide that shows evidence of rotational movement along a curved slip surface. Subaqueous slides may occur on slopes of less than one degree, and may range upward in size fron tens of square meters to square kilometers in area and more than 100 m in thickness (Moore, 1961; Heezen and Drake, 1964; Lewis, 1971; Hampton and Bouma, 1977). Subaqueous mass flows involve the downslope movement under gravity of water-saturated, unconsolidated sediment; the moving mass may behave plastically or as a very viscous fluid, and movement may be slow or rapid (Dott, 1963). The velocity and displacement of flow characteristically decrease gradually with depth below the surface, so that the deposit lacks a distinct slip surface. Subaqueous flow deposits are identified on seismic reflection records by the presence of 1) anomalously thick, apparently detached sediment masses that 2) lack an identifiable slip plane and 3) show acoustic transparency or chaotic internal structure. Sediment creep in the marine environment is a form of flow; it is a poorly understood and poorly documented phenomenon. As used here, it refers to the slow, more-or-less continuous, downslope movement of the upper layers of unconsolidated sediment and is characterized by hummocky sea-floor topography,
18

deformed but identifiable acoustic bedding in the upper sediment layers, a downward decrease in the degree of deformation, and the apparent absence of a slip surface. Creep appears on seismic records to extend to subbottom depths of 15-20 m, and may affect large areas.
K
Numerous areas of sediment gravity sliding are . ped in the Gulf of Santa Catalina region, the majority in the northern part between San Mateo Point and the San Pedro shelf (pi. 5). These areas, in general, are characterized on high-resolution seismic reflection records by a hummockv seafloor surface and, in the subsurface, by steeply dipping, more-or-less distinct reflections extending upward to or near the sea floor. We believe that these reflections represent geologically young slip surfaces and that the areas comprise a continuous series of rotated and translated sediment masses. Zones of failure typically occur on slopes of 4 degrees or less, at water depths ranging from 250 m to 900 m, and extend to a depth of as much as 50 m below the sea floor. Where the dimensions of these zones of failure could be determined from multiple line crossings, they were found to range in area from about one square kilometer to about 12 km2 . Based on a single line crossing and extrapolation from bathymetric characteristics, one zone 15 km west-southwest of Point La Jolla may be larger, 18 km2 or more in area (pi. 5). Extensive sampling was done for a geotechnical and sedimentologic evaluation of a failure zone off San Mateo Point; the results of that study are summarized by Edwards and others (1980).
Rotational slumps were noted in six areas (pi. 5). One slump area is located near the base of the San Pedro Escarpment 15-20 km south of Point Fermin at water depths of 700 m to 850 m. This area was crossed by three lines, and is estimated to cover 8 to 9 km2 . The remaining areas are located
19

on the east side of the southern Gulf of Santa Catalina, from just north of Oceanside to the U.S.-Mexico border. Water depths range from 100 m to 700 m. Two areas were crossed by two or more lines, so that their dimensions could be determined. One, located near the head of Coronado Canyon, covers an area of 6-8 km^. The most extensive slump deposits in the region are found in the upper part of La Jolla Canyon. Four scarps, extending for about 13 km, are mapped along the south side of the canyon, and three more, extending for about 8 km, are mapped on the north side. The breadth across the canyon of the area affected is about 4 km, and water depths over the slump zones range from 100 m to 600 m. Failure planes extend to or near the sea floor, attesting to the recency of movement of some blocks; the depth of failure in some places exceeds 40 m, and may extend to 80 m or more.
Two areas interpreted as the deposits of sediment gravity flows are located at or near the base of the slope between Newport Beach and Dana Point, at water depths ranging from about 400 m to 700 m. These areas are characterized on high-resolution seismic reflection records by convex upward, hummocky-appearing bulges of the sea floor and disruption or absence of shallow subbottom reflectors. The larger of the areas was crossed by four lines, and was determined to cover nearly 60 km^ and to extend to a depth of 40 m or more below the sea floor. These deposits probably represent repeated episodes of relatively recent, small-scale mass movement.
Sediment creep was noted on the east slope of the Gulf of Santa Catalina on six line crossings, four in the southern part of the region between Oceanside and San Diego and two off Newport Beach. The zones of creep range from 3 km to 6 km in length (downslope) and extend from water depths of 150 m to nearly 700 m. Creep in this region appears to affect sediments to a
20

maximum depth of about 20 m below the sea floor; in the areas off Newport Beach and Del Mar, creep zones appear to merge downslope with areas of sediment gravity sliding (pi. 5).
Large buried channels, probably reflecting erosion and infilling during Pleistocene sea level fluctuations, were mapped in three localities in the Gulf of Santa Catalina region (pi. 5). The largest channel, located at a water depth of about 50 m on the San Pedro shelf, is nearly 2 km across. The extent of this channel is unknown as it was identified on only one line crossing. The channel is located near the head of the modern San Gabriel Canyon system, and is presumed to have been associated with that canyon system during Pleistocene time. A second channel, located about 15 km southsouthwest of Newport Beach, is believed to have been associated with the Pleistocene Newport Canyon system. This filled channel, crossed by three lines, is about one kilometer wide and 12 km long and lies at water depths ranging from 250 m to 575 m. A third channel was identified low on the east slope of the Gulf of Santa Catalina 25 km west-southwest of Oceanside at a water depth of 750 rn. This channel is about 1.5 km in breadth; the extent and relationship of this channel to pre-Holocene drainage systems was not determined.
Prominant levees associated with the Newport Submarine Canyon system were mapped on the lower slope and basin floor northeast of Lasuen Knoll and southeast of the San Pedro shelf (pi. 5). These deposits occur at water depths of 450 m to 750 m or more; they are characteristically 1-2 km wide and range from 6 km to 11 km in length.
Four other areas of levee development were noted elsewhere in the Gulf of banta Catalina. One of these, located at a depth of about 1000 m northeast of
21

Thirtymile Bank and at least 8 km long, appears to be associated with drainage from Carlsbad Canyon; another/ located northwest of Coronado Bank at a depth of 760 m - 900 m and at least 2 km long/ is probably related to sediment transport through Loma Sea Valley.
These levees are Quaternary in age and some may be undergoing construction at present. The stability of levee deposits varies greatly; however/ they probably are composed largely of fine sand and silt size sediment which may be prone to liquefaction while unconsolidated (Blatt and others, 1972). The bearing strength of these deposits should be considered suspect/ especially in an area as seismically active as the Gulf of Santa Catalina, until shown otherwise by engineering studies.
Hydrocarbon Seepage and Shallow Gas Accumulations Natural gases of biogenic and thermogenic origin may be present in marine
sediments. Biogenic gases, principally methane/ are derived from bacterial alteration of organic material in sediments (Claypool and Kaplan, 1974). Thermogenic gases, dominated by hydrocarbons heavier than methane, are byproducts of petroleum formation (Bernard and others, 1976). The presence of thermogenic gases in sediments can reflect an over-pressured zone that is discharging gas into the overlying strata either directly or via a conduit such as a fault or bedding plane. Inadvertant penetration of an overpressured zone or gas escape conduit accompanied by sudden venting of gas at the surface can pose a hazard to drilling operations. Additionally, gas of either type dissolved in the interstitial pore space of sediment can lower the shear strength of the enclosing sediment, thus leading to underconsolidation and increased likelihood of failure (Sangrey, 1977); under some circumstances
22

dissolved gas can liquefy spontaneously when subjected to cyclic loading (Hall and Ensiminger, 1979).
Wilkinson's (1971) study of California offshore oil and gas seeps shows seepage to have been reported from the San Pedro shelf area near Point Fermin, from the northeast slope of San Pedro basin and from near shore in the vicinity of Huntington Beach. Greene and others (1975, p. 65 and pi. 13) report additional seeps off the Palos Verdes Hills between Point Vicente and Point Fermin, where they may be associated with the Cabrillo fault zone. Water column anomalies, possibly seeps, are reported by Richmond and others (1981) to be present on the San Pedro shelf in the vicinity of the Cabrillo and Palos Verdes Hills fault zones. Additionally, acoustic anomalies thought to represent shallow gas occur at subbottom depths of 15 to 150 milliseconds (two-way travel time) at scattered locations on the San Pedro shelf and adjacent slope, commonly associated with the Palos Verdes Hills fault zone.
Elsewhere, acoustic anomalies thought to reflect the presence of gas are reported in isolated localities from the slope southwest of Dana Point and Oceanside, at water depths in excess of 500 m and at depths below the seafloor of 50 to more than 350 milliseconds, and in sedimentary rocks underlying the shelf and slope off San Diego, at subbottom depths ranging from 70 to more than 500 milliseconds (Richmond and others, 1981). Water column anomalies reported on Coronado Bank and the shelf to the east, near the southern margin of the study area, may reflect hydrocarbon seepage in those areas (Richmond and others 1981).
Four small areas of acoustic anomaly possibly representing accumulations of gas in sediments were identified during this study at shallow subbottom depths on the San Pedro shelf (pi. 5). Three areas were noted in relatively
23

shallow water 15 to 20 km south of Long Beach; two of these are in dipping strata of probable late Tertiary and Quaternary age and one appears to be associated with an offshore extension of the Palos Verdes Hills fault zone. The third area south of Long Beach occurs in horizontally bedded strata of Quaternary age at a subbottom depth of 30 to 35 milliseconds. A similar appearing acoustic anomaly was noted about 7 km southwest of Newport Beach 10 to 20 milliseconds beneath the sea floor in flat-lying Quaternary sediments.
A single water column anomaly/ possibly a seep/ was identified on the San Pedro shelf about 16 km south of Long Beach (pi. 5); the anomaly lies above folded and faulted strata of probable late Miocene age/ and in close proximity to deformation related to the offshore extension of the Palos Verdes Hills fault zone.
Sediment Thickness and Character The thickness of acoustically transparent sediment in the Gulf of Santa
Catalina region is shown on Plate 6. This acoustic transparency on high resolution seismic reflection records is caused largely by the similarity in the velocity of sound in water and in sediment/ which reflects the poorly consolidated/ water-saturated state of these deposits. These sediments are presumed to be of late Quaternary, probably Holocene age. The deposits mapped unconformably overlie pre-Quaternary bedrock on the shelf and upper slope/ where they probably represent the total thickness of Quaternary sediment. However/ they conformably overlie older sediments of presumed Quaternary age on the lower slopes and in the basins of this region, and the thickness of the Quaternary section in these areas is probably greater than is indicated by Plate 6.
24

The distribution of Quaternary sediment on the San Pedro shelf is complex, partly the result of ponding of sediment in the lee of bedrock irregularities produced by faulting. Generally, Quaternary sediment is thin or absent over much of the San Pedro shelf west of t1 Palos Verdes Hills
* fault zone, but locally exceeds 15 m in thickness on <e shelf east of the fault zone (cf. pi. 4). A bedrock ridge extends from Point Fermin southeastward along the west side of San Gabriel Canyon; this ridge, formed by displacement along the Palos Verdes Hills fault, appears to have acted as a barrier to sediment dispersal during Quaternary time. The thickest deposits on this shelf segment occur near the shelf break between the San Gabriel and Newport Canyon systems (pi. 6). Quaternary sediment cover on the shelf segment between Jewport Beach and Point La Jolla is thin, generally less than 10 m. Locally, as off Dana Point and between San Mateo Point and Oceanside, these deposits reach 15 m to 20 m in thickness (pi. 6), probably reflecting the damming of littoral drift by projecting headlands and the proximity of sediment sources to the shelf (e.g., San Mateo Creek, San Onofre Creek, Las Pulgas Creek, and the Santa Margarita River). Quaternary sediment is thin, commonly less than 5 in thick, over most of the San Diego shelf. A prominent bedrock high extends from seaward of Point La Jolla along the coast to and southward from Point Loma; a second bedrock ridge extends along the outer shelf between Point Loma and Coronado Canyon (pi. 6).
Quaternary slope deposits are thin, characteristically 5 m to 10 m or less in thickness. Deposits are thickest in areas of moderate slope off river mouths and in the vicinity of canyons (e.g., off Newport Beach and Oceanside, pi. 6). Many steeper slopes appear devoid of Quaternary sediment other than a thin hemipelagic drape. Quaternary deposits thicken basinward, and ultimately
25

merge conformably with late Tertiary sediments from which they could not be separated on high-resolution seismic profiles.
Sediment types and sources in the Gulf of Santa Catalina region are mapped by Welday and Williams (1975) and are discussed by Emery (1952, 1960), Stevenson and others (1959), Wimberly (1964), and Gorsline and Grant (1972). Quaternary sediment on the San Pedro shelf consists principally of fine sand and silt, with coarse relict beach or terrace deposits along the western edge, detrital sand seaward of the Santa Ana and San Gabriel Rivers, and fine detrital silt and clay along the inner shelf between about San Pedro and the mouth of the San Gabriel River (Moore, 1954; Uchupi and Gaal, 1963; Bandy and others, 1964; Gorsline and Grant, 1972). The principal sources of modern sediment on the San Pedro shelf are the Los Angeles, San Gabriel and Santa Ana Rivers (Gorsline and Grant, 1972; Karl, 1976, 1980).
The shelf segment between Newport Beach and La Jolla is characterized by fine sand to silt-size sediment, with admixtures of fine to medium sand adjacent to the mouths of rivers and relict sand locally along the shelf edge. A study of the San Diego shelf by Henry (1976) indicates that well sorted, fine to medium sand blankets the shelf at water depths shallower than 20 m and grades seaward to silt-size sediment at greater water depths. Relict gravels are present locally along the shelf edge and on topographic highs. The principal modern sources of sediment on the San Diego shelf are the San Diego and Tijuana Rivers (henry, 1976).
Summary of Hazards Several geologic features and conditions in the Gulf of Santa Catalina
region merit special attention, as they are potentially hazardous to offshore
26

development. Foremost among these are active faulting, seismicity and seafloor instability. Prominent, geologically young faults that displace the sea floor or cut Quaternary sediments occur (1) on the inner shelf from north of Oceanside to Point La Jolla along the Newport-Inglewood-Rose Canyon fault zone, (2) on the San Pedro shelf and in the Gulf of Santa Catalina from Lasuen Knoll to Coronado Bank along the Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Bank fault zone, (3) in the Gulf of Santa Catalina and on the San Diego shelf along two unnamed 30-50 km long fault zones lying between the Newport-Inglewood-Rose Canyon and Palos Verdes Hills-Coronado Bank fault zones, (4) in the northern and central San Diego Trough along San Diego Trough fault zone, and (5) along the northeast flank of Thirtymile Bank (pis. 4, 5). These groups of faults probably reflect a broad zone of active shear (pi. 4). Additionally, the San Pedro shelf off Newport Beach was the site of a strong (M6.3-6.6) earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood fault zone that caused considerable damage in the Long Beach area in 1933 (Barrows, 1974).
The region is seismically active, especially the northern part in the vicinity of the Los Angeles Basin and adjacent offshore areas. Epicenter plots attest to recent movement on faults in the Newport-Inglewood, Palos Verdes Hills and Coronado Bank fault zones, on an unnamed fault lying about 5 km northeast of, and parallel to the Coronado Bank fault, and possibly on the Rose Canyon fault zone (pi. 4). In addition, this offshore region has been shaken by numerous moderate (M6-M7) and major (M>7) earthquakes in adjacent onshore areas of southern California and northern Baja California during historic time.
Associated with the hazards of faulting and seismicity are those resulting from ground shaking and seafloor mass movement, sediment flowage,
27

and liquefaction. Evidence of geologically young sea-floor mass movement is common on high-resolution seismic reflection records from this region (pi. 5), and the presence of relatively steep slopes may promote failures in accumulations of unconsolidated sediment flanking the mainland shelf, Catalina Island, Thirtymile Bank, and the several bedrock knolls in the Gulf of Santa Catalina. The presence of gas in sediments reduces their shear strength, contributing to the possibility of failure. Evidence of shallow gas and hydrocarbon seepage has been noted in Quaternary sediments on the San Pedro shelf in this study and in studies by Wilkinson (1971), Greene and others (1975) and Richmond and others (1981), and elsewhere on the mainland shelf and Coronado Bank by Richmond and others (1981).
Large sediment gravity slides up to 12 km^ or more in area and extending to subbottom depths of 50 m or more are mapped on slopes flanking the mainland shelf between Newport Beach and San Mateo Point, and off Point La Jolla (pi. 5). Geotechnical and sedimentological studies of a failure zone off San Mateo Point are reported by Edwards and others (1980). Rotational slumps are mapped at isolated localities throughout the region, but are most numerous along the southeast margin of the Gulf of Santa Catalina, from just north of Oceanside to the U.S.-Mexico border (pi. 5). The most extensive areas of slumping are in the upper part of La Jolla Canyon, where 7 scarps are mapped for 13 km or more along the canyon margins. Failure planes associated with these slumps locally cut the sea bottom to a depth of 40 m or more. An extensive area interpreted as the deposits of sediment gravity flows and slides that are no longer active is mapped on the mainland slope between Newport Beach and Dana Point, and evidence of sediment creep is noted in seismic reflection records from isolated localities along the mainland slope
28

throughout the region (pi. 5). CENTRAL SANTA ROSA-CORTES RIDGE by M.E. Field
Introduction The central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge includes the bank tops, slopes and
basin margins of the ridge, the San Nicolas Island platform, and Dall and Nidever Banks. The study area extends from approximately 33°44'N on the north to 32°45'N on the south, and from 119°00'W on the east to 120°00'W on the west (fig. 2).
The morphology of the study area is shown in Figure 2. The San Nicolas Island platform is a broad, flat, 50 to 200 in-deep shelf extending northwest from the island. San Nicolas Island extends nearly 300 m above sea level in the southeast part of the platform. Elsewhere, the central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge lies at greater depths and is more irregular, especially in the vicinity of Dall Bank. The ridge is flanked by moderate to steep slopes that range in declivity from about 2° to 20°. Most slopes are in the range from 3° to 13°, and the average slope is about 8°. Slopes flanking the central Santa RosaCortes Ridge are incised by numerous canyons, gullies, and sea valleys.
A geophysical reconnaissance of this area was made by the USGS aboard the R/V KELEZ in 1973. Additional seismic reflection lines and a series of gravity cores and grab samples were obtained from the San Nicolas Island platform and adjacent slopes aboard the USGS vessel R/V LEE in 1976; however, the majority of data used in this report were obtained in 1978 aboard the R/V SEA SOUNDER. During the latter cruise, data from 160 kJ single channel sparker, Uniboom, and 3.5 kHz acoustic systems were obtained simultaneously on
29

120

119 30'

119

0 5 10 15 20 KM

Figure 2. Location map, central Santa Rosa - Cortes Ridge area.
30

a series of profile lines covering the entire study area (pi.7).
Geologic Structure Vedder and others (1974) have described the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge as
"the most persistent geomorphic feature east of the Patton Escarpment." The ridge extends from Santa Rosa Island on the north to the southeast end of Cortes Bank, a distance of over 200 km. Flat topped and asymmetric in crosssection, the ridge includes San Nicolas Island and its surrounding platform shelf, which form an east southeast-trending salient. The structure, rocks, and sediment of the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge have been studied by Emery (1960), Moore (1969), Uchupi (1961), Vedder and Others (1974), Vedder (1976), Arnal (1976), Field and Richmond (1980) and Greene and others (1975). Much of the most recent and comprehensive information on stratigraphy and structure appears in Vedder and others (1974) and the following discussion is capsulized from their work.
The Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge is a broad anticline composed of Tertiary sedimentary rock, with a complex pattern of faults and minor folds superimposed on the main northwest trend. The platform shelf of San Nicolas Island consists of out-cropping Eocene siltstone and sandstone that are thinly veneered by Quaternary sediment. Eocene rocks also crop out locally in the vicinity of Dall and Nidever Banks (fig. 2; pi. 3). Northwest and southeast of San Nicolas Island, the top of the ridge is composed of lower, middle, and upper Miocene sedimentary rocks, and volcanic rock of Miocene age is present in isolated exposures along the ridge. Pliocene rocks are uncommon along the ridge top, but crop out on the upper slopes of both flanks of the ridge. The lower slopes of the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge and the adjacent basins contain
31

appreciable thicknesses (>100 m) of Quaternary mud. The geology of San Nicolas Island has been described by Vedder and Norris
(1963) and Cole (1970, 1977). The island is underlain principally by interbedded marine sandstone and siItstone of Eocene age that are capped by Quaternary dune and terrace deposits. The exposed Eocene rocks comprise a marine section more than 1000 m thick that crops out along the flanks of a broad, complexly faulted, southeast-plunging anticline. Two major sets of intersecting faults trend approximately N30°W and N80°E and offset the axis o c the major anticline. These faults appear to be contemporaneous and probably are pre-middle Miocene in age, although lesser fault movements occurred through late Pleistocene time. Diving observations by Vedder and Norris (1963) and Menard and others (1954) indicate the structure of the shelf northwest of San Nicolas Island to be similar to that on the island itself. Faults mapped offshore in this study also have trends that are similar to those observed on the island. Vedder and Norris (1963) note that, in addition to the evidence of recent tectonic activity from fault separations in Pleistocene deposits on San Nicolas Island, significant uplift of marine terraces has occurred around the island. Elevations of these terraces do not correspond to Pleistocene eustatic levels, indicating that appreciable uplift has occurred in the past two million years.
The structure of the central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge is shown on Plate 9. Fold patterns generally conform to the major trends identified by Weaver and Doerner (1969), Moore (1969) and Vedder and others (1974). The northwest-trending anticline forming the axis of San Nicolas Island swings northwestward offshore, merging with the northwest-trending structural grain of the central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge. Minor folds south and north of the
32

island and on the adjacent slopes and basins generally conform to these trends (pi. 9). Orientations shown for short fault traces on Plate 9 are based on single trackline crossings and on inferences from topographic trends, hence are less reliable than orientations shown for longer fault traces that have been correlated between adjacent tracklines. With few exceptions, faults that can be correlated between tracklines are interpreted *<-. conforming to the general west to northwest trend of the principal structural fabric of the ridge.
Seismic hazards Faults. Many of the morphologic features on the central Santa Rosa-
Cortes Ridge reflect faulting. Most notably, the south side of the Gan Nicolas Island platform is bordered by scarps formed by west-trending faults that swing gradually northwestward as they merge with the ridge proper.
Approximately 24 faults of those shown on Plate 9 displace the seafloor. Host faults displacing the sea floor are shown as pre-^uaternary in age, as much of the sea floor on the ridge and bank tops is exposed Tertiary bedrock. Whether this merely reflects the thinness or absence of Quaternary sediment or is a true indication of the age of faulting is difficult to establish. The angularity in seismic profiles of some sea-floor scarps implies that some displacement may be Quaternary in age, and on the lower slopes and basin floors where Pleistocene and Holocene fine-grained sediments are prevalent numerous faults of Quaternary age are mapped.
Most faults displacing Holocene and Pleistocene sediment on tho sea floor show less than 10 m of vertical separation. Older faults that displace the sea floor (e.g., the fault bordering the south side of the San Nicolas Island
33

platform) may have up to several hundred meters of vertical offset, although most show vertical offsets of less than 50 ra. The style of faulting is not readily apparent from seismic reflection data. Field and Richmond (1980) suggest that strike-slip faulting has occurred on the northern Santa RosaCortes Ridge. Right-lateral strike slip probably is the principal type of fault movement in the southern California borderland and the adjacent onshore region, and it is likely that this style of faulting is prevalent in the central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge and San Nicolas Island area as well. This is significant in that faults displaying minor apparent vertical separations also may have major components of lateral separation.
Seismicity. Earthquake activity in the outer borderland has been monitored by the California Institute of Technology since 1932 (Kileman and others/ 1973). In I960, the USGS established a seismograph network in the vicinity of the Santa Barbara channel that allowed the recording of events along the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge. Data from these two sources form the basis for interpretation of seismicity in this region.
Numerous small to intermediate earthquakes have occurred within 100 km of the central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge during the nearly 48 year interval between January 1, 1932 and September 30, 1979 (pi. 10). ilost of the 151 seismic events recorded for this area have had an estimated magnitude of less than 4 on the Richter Scale. Ten earthquakes have had a magnitude in excess of 4 and three of these were greater than 5.
34

TABLE 1. Earthquakes in the vicinity of the

central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge (1932-1979)

Magnitude

No. of Events

Avg. No. per Decade

< 2.9

59

10.2

3.0-3.9

82

17.1

4.0-4.9

7

1.5

5.0-5.9

3

0.6

Earthquakes of greater than 5 magnitude occurred at distances of 2 and 25 kn

from San Nicolas Island in 1947 and 1969, respectively.

Epicenter locations shown in Plate 10 do not demonstrate a pattern that

can be related to known faults or landforms. The majority are shown to have

occurred east of San Nicolas Island in the vicinity of the west flank of the

Osborn Bank and the Santa Barbara-San Clemente Ridge. The apparent lack of

epicenters on the central banta Rosa-Cortes Ridge may result in part fro.n the

relatively great distances to recording stations and the resultant imprecision

in epicenter location. Lee and Vedder (1973) compared epicenter locations in

the Santa Barbara Channel region, as determined by the California Institute of

Technology and U.S.G.S. data sets. Their analysis shows local discrepancies

of as much as 39 km between the two sets of solutions. This difficulty in

accurately establishing the locations of earthquakes increases in the more

remote areas of the California continental borderland. The primary value of

the data presented in Plate 10 lies in their indication of the frequency and

magnitudes of earthquakes that have occurred in this region.

Seafloor Instability Slopes in the southern California borderland are avenues of mass

35

transport of sediments t> the adjacent basins (Field and Edwards, 1980). Although sediment sources in the central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge area are limited, particularly since the most recent eustatic rise in sea level, a combination of factors including the presence of unconsolidated sediments, relatively steep slopes, and moderate seismic activity have acted to produce numerous small slides and flows (pi. 11). Slumps (rotated slides) are identified on seismic reflection records as discrete sediment packages with hummocky or mounded upper surfaces, and chaotic or rotated internal reflectors. Most slumps in the study area are 0.5 to 5 km in width. They occur on slopes of varying declivity, but are more commonly recognized on the more gentle slopes. Using a deeply-towed acoustic source, Field and Clarke (1979) identified six small failure zones that hacl not been recognized by use of surface-operated equipment. All the zones lie within a small (~150 km 2 ) intercanyon segment of the slope east of Gan Ilicolas Island; each is different in size, geometry, age, and probable mechanism of failure. Because of the relatively small size of failures mapped on Plate 11, the density of napped failures reflects to a large degree the trackline spacing and quality of highresolution seismic reflection data. Failure zones marked with an "F" on Plate 11 are interpreted as flow deposits. Flow deposits commonly are thin, acoustically transparent, and are bounded by a rounded nose or curved surface on the downslope side. Their identification is difficult because they lack other diagnostic features. Consequently, flo«? deposits may be more abundant than shown on Plate 11, particularly in the adjacent basins, which are presumed to be the sites of deposition for most flows generated on the adjacent slopes (Gorsline, 1980; Field and Edwards, 1980).
Studies of planktic Foraminifera populations fron cores on the slopes of
36

the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge show that sediment mixing by small-scale gravity transport is ubiquitous. These analyses by Gerta Keller (written commun., 1977) show that modern slope sediments contain an appreciable amount (commonly more than 50 percent) of reworked Foraminifera, i.e., broken, abraded, and stained Miocene tests that are admixed with a nopiilation of Quaternary Foraminifera. Miocene strata are exposed 01 the upper slopes aid edges of the ridge, and these strata are presumably the source for the reworked fauna (Field and Edwards, 1980). The frequency of sediment failures on the slope is not known. Those mapped are all Quaternary in age, but whether they are all related to lower stands of sea level is not clear. The freshness of many of the failures indicates that they are geologically young, and some may have occurred within historical time. Moreover, undisturbed Holocene fine-grained sediment is present on many steep slopes in the study area, and there exists a potential for future failures in these deposits.
In addition to evidence of mass transport on smooth slopes, a large number of canyons and channels incising the slopes appear to be active conduits for channelized flows. The presence of sharp, well defined channels, levee systems, and coarse sediments in canyon axes all suggest that sediments periodically are transported through these channel systems to the adjacent basins.
Hydrocarbon Seepage and Shallow Gas Accumulations Only one area was identified as having acoustic anomalies that night
reflect shallow gas accumulation. The area was noted on two intersecting profile lines and lies on the shelf west of San iJicolas Island (pi. 11). The appearance of these anomalies, coupled with the shallow water depth (50
37

meters)/ suggests that they may be caused by kelp rather than by gas; however, this could not be resolved with the data available.
No evidence of shallow gas accumulation in sediments was noted in seismic reflection profiles collected for this study in the Dall Bank area. However, examination of closely spaced lines in this area by Richmond and others (1981) indicates that two small zones of shallow gas and seeps and seep mounds are present in six tracts offered for sale in OCS lease sale 48. Seeps from both bedrock and unconsolidated sediment were noted, and some seeps appear to be associated with faults.
Sediment Character and Thickness Little information has been published about the character and thickness
of the sediment cover on the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge or San Nicolas Island platform. Uchupi (1961) reported results of selective grab samples along the ridge and Norris (1951) reported the lithology of samples collected from the shallow platform shelf around San Nicolas Island.
Analysis of high-resolution records collected for this study indicates that modern sediments are exceedingly thin or absent on the ridge crest. Those areas generally having less than 2 rn of unconsolidated sedineat cover are shown in Plate 11. The irregularity of the shelf surface in these areas indicates it is composed mostly of outcropping Tertiary bedrock with essentially no sediment cover. Along the shelf edge south of the island lies a long, thin band of sediment that is between 5 and 10 m thick (pi. 11). This band is the only significant accumulation of modern sediment on the ridge top.
Welday and Williams (1975) have compiled available sediment information to produce a map showing the distribution of various sediment types along the
38

entire California continental margin. The results of USGS sampling within this study area agree closely with their map. The map of Welday and Williams (1975)/ modified to reflect sample data obtained by the USGS in 1976 and data reported to the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) by Science Applications/ Inc.,
K
is shown as Plate 12. The shallow areas of the ridge i island platforms are shown to be areas of outcropping bedrock having a thin veneer of predominantly sand-size material. Deeper areas on the axis of the ridge contain bands of fine sand, and the upper slopes are characterized by a mixture of mud with lesser amounts of sand. The lower slopes and basins contain thick sequences of very fine-grained sediment, dominantly fine silt and clay. Barnes (1970) reports average grain sizes of 5 to 10 microns for sediments on the lower slope and basin east of San Uicolas Island.
Mean grain size and percent each of sand, calcium carbonate, and organic carbon for samples collected by the USGS in 1976 and data reported to the BLM by Science Applications, Inc. is presented in Plate 13. Many samples collected froii the shelf around ban Uicolas Island contain clasts and rock fragments in addition to the high proportion that are predominantly sand. The percent sand figures reflect the coarseness of shelf and ridge sediments; the presence of coarse sediment in canyons and on slopes also reflects the downslope movement of shelf sediments (pi. 13). The calciuin carbonate values show that a high proportion of biogenic material, chiefly Foraminifera, is present in modern sediments on the ridge and adjacent slopes.
The thinness and nature of surficial sediments on the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge and the San Nicolas Island shelf indicate that, at present, deposition is minor. Sediments are reworked by long-period waves and major cross-ridge currents resulting in a thin sandy lag deposit that has a large component of
39

biogenic material. Silt eroded from the ridge top presumably is deposited in basins and on the adjacent slopes. Coarser materials are carried in a traction layer across the shelf, predominantly to the eastern edge, where they are transported down canyons and gullies and down slope by processes of mass movement (Field and Edwards, 1980).
Summary of Hazards The central Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge and San Nicolas Island platform are
situate^ in a widely varied tectonic and sedimentary environment. Faults are common throughout the area on the ridge top, on the flanking slopes, and in basins. Activity along major faults has created major geomorphic features, such as scarps. The ages of many faults on the truncated, current-swept ridge top are uncertain, but displacement of the sea floor and Quaternary sediments on lower slopes and basin floors indicates Quaternary fault movement. Additional evidence of recent tectonic activity is reflected by historical epicenter data. Although earthquake activity is moderate relative to other parts of the borderland, there have been over 150 recorded seismic events in the past 48 years, ten of them between 4 and 6 in magnitude. These events have the capability of inducing fault movement, ground shaking, and sediment failure by liquefaction and mass movement.
The platform shelf around San Hicolas Island and the crest of the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge are nearly devoid of sediment except for a thin veneer of sand and gravel, indicating minor sediment input and strong scour by currents. The steep slopes of the ridge are composed of unconsolidated clayey silts that are failing and moving downslope as slides and flows. The ages of
40

failures are not well established but the abundance of failures suggest that processes of mass movement are presently active. These slopes are incised by numerous gullies/ canyons/ and sea valleys that show evidence of recent channelized flows.
WESTERN SANTA BARBARA CHANNEL POINT CONCEPTION REGION by h.G. Greene
Introduction The region studied lies in the extreme northwestern part of the southern
California borderland/ in the western Santa Barbara Channel. It comprises an area of approximately 12/750 km 9 that extends offshore and southwestward from Point Conception and Point Arguello/ and lies to the north and west of San Miguel Island (fig. 3). Geophysical data were collected from the narrow continental shelf and from the northern Channel Islands platform and continental slope/ at depths ranging from 50 m to over 2500 m.
The offshore Point Conception area is physiographically complex. The shelf that fronts the shoreline between Point Conception and Santa Barbara is narrow/ generally less than 6 km wide. This shelf widens as it swings westward and northward around Point Conception/ and is nearly 20 km wide offshore from the Santa Maria area. The shelf break is sharp and well defined at the 100 m contour/ where a 20 m to 60 m scarp exists. West of Point Conception/ past the western sill of the Santa Barbara Basin, the slope is wider and less steep than in the Santa Barbara Channel.
The continental slope seaward of Point Arguello and Point Conception is
41

121° 30'

120

Figure 3. Location map, western Santa Barbara Channel - Point Conception area. Interpreted seismic reflection profiles A-A' and B-B' are shown in figures 4 and 5.
42

incised by the many hea^.. of Arguello submarine canyon. These tributaries notch the seaward edge of the shelf at or near the 100 m isobath. The canyon heads form a radiating pattern, with their prevalent orientation swinging fron nearly west in the northern part of the region to nearly south in the southern part.
Data used in this study were collected during the May-June, 1978 cruise of the R/V SEA SOUNDER (USGS Cruise S2-78-SC); trackline locations from this cruise are shown as Plate 14. A preliminary geologic map (pi. 15) was constructed from shallow-penetration, high-resolution (Uniboom) continuous seismic reflection profiles. Deep-penetration, low-resolution reflection profiles collected simultaneously were used to correlate deep structures with shallow features observed in the high-resolution data. Maps depicting bottom morphology and thickness of Quaternary sediments were also compiled from the geophysical data (pis. 16 and 17). Faults mapped from these data are compared with earthquake epicentral data in a map showing faults and seismicity for the region (pi. 18). Other geophysical profiles were used to fill data voids and to more accurately correlate major structures. For example, intermediatepenetration, low-resolution sparker profiles collected by the US(JS aboard the R/V POLARIS in 1972 (Wolf, 1975), Bendix (Marine Advisors) data collected in 1970 and reported on by ilESA 2 , Inc. (1978) and Dames and Moore (1978), and side-scan sonar profiles collected by B. P. Luyendyk and D. S. Simonetti in 1977 and 1978 under Sea Grant Number R/E 18 were used to fill in structural detail on the continental shelf east of Point Conception. Preliminary interpretations of intermediate-penetration and high-resolution, digitally processed sparker profiles collected by McClelland Engineers in 1979 for the USGS-Conservation Division (USGS Data Set PA 17200) were used to map structure
43

along the northern margin (slope) of the western Santa Barbara Basin. Structure in the shallow subsurface was correlated with that in the deeper subsurface by comparing deep-penetration CDP multi-channel profiles with intermediate- and shallow-penetration profiles. Side-scan sonar profiles were studied for surficial evidence of sea floor instability and faulting on the continental shelf east of Point Conception.
Seismic Interpretations Five major acoustic units have been identified in the seismic reflection
profiles used in this study; these units are correlated with acoustic units A through E defined by McCulloch and others (1979) from CDP multi-channel seismic-reflection data. Apparent ages of structures identified in the profiles are based on the correlation of these acoustic units with core hole samples obtained from the Point Conception deep stratigraphic test well OCSCAL 78-164 No. 1 (Cook, 1979). Offshore acoustic units were also correlated with rocks exposed onshore/ where possible/ and with sea-floor samples. Line drawings were made for most of the 1978 USGS seismic reflection profiles; two of these drawings are included in this report as Figures 4 and 5. The location of these line drawings is shown in Figure 3.
McCulloch and others (1979) have defined acoustic units in a CDP multichannel seismic reflection profile across the continental slope of the Point Conception region/ and have correlated them with lithostratigraphic units sampled in the Point Conception deep stratigraphic test (COST) well OCS-CAL 78-164 No. 1. This acoustic zonation has been applied to the profiles used in this study. Acoustic units A through E/ as used in this report/ are described below:
44

(D £>
cn H NvIJi n3f>t
00 H{ W t3 -O-' HCD
ft en P(Di
(D fl> M
(D
c: H*o
W l(-Dti Ul Mi M
O (D ^O OO O3 0»
oo
3 Hj
(D M
(jO

Depth in meters

Depth in meters

01 o o o

oton

o o o

_ ai o o

o o o

o o

I I I_____I I

rO

o
os
o

ooao>

Seconds- Two-way travel time

1.8

n> (/)

oi

m

o o

aT O a. Q

it

00

2

\ 01 ro
bb
Seconds Two-way travel time

o

Depth in meters
80O1 c0oron rOooo oo_cn ooo- ocoji
I____I____I____!____i____|_
fD Ui
3 ft fD
nnf>>t

Depth in meters

CM O
Oo

ooo>

ooo

oooi

6oo

ooS5

DO

oo -o

DO oo

n>
Hj l-»

oro ^fjl O O

oo

fD

Q

ft H.' O

o 7;

3 o"

3
C-D*
o CID
OJ w
oo

Oo

cn

to

»1 j
cn0n0

o-& oo

oo

cn <
CD
mfD n o>

o0oo1 o0oo1
O
g-0Of)t
3

r^ ^ OJ
b

rio

Seconds-Two-way travel time

oooo> DO

r -&

01 b

ro b

n_ b

o

Seconds-Two-way travel time

CD

Unit A - This unit is about 0.10 sec (2-way travel time) thick and is generally masked by the bubble-pulse in our seismic reflection profiles (figs. 4, 5). The base of this unit is locally defined by a high amplitude reflector that correlated with the base of McCulloch and others' (1979) acoustic unit A on the basis of 2-way travel time. The age of this unit is Quaternary and it apparently includes sediments of both Pleistocene and Holocene age.
Unit B - This unit comprises a package of relatively strong and continuous reflectors that remain an approximately uniform thickness in seismic reflection profiles. The base of this unit lies at a depth of about 0.24 sec (2-way travel time) beneath the sea floor, and marks a change in acoustic character from continuous well-layered reflectors to discontinuous, weak and somewhat contorted reflectors. McCulloch and others (1979) indicate that this boundary marks a change in lithology from predominately silty claystone of late Pliocene to Quaternary age (unit B) to conglomerate and silty sandstone of late Pliocene age (unit C).
Unit C - This unit comprises an interval of low amplitude, locally folded, discontinuous reflectors that vary in thickness and unconformably overlie an interval of more continuous, higher amplitude reflectors. This unit is described by McCulloch and others (1979) as a silty sandstone of late Pliocene age; it is marked at its base by a high amplitude reflector at a depth of approximately 0.75 sec (2-way travel time) beneath the sea
47

floor. This horizon in the COST well marks a change in lithology from sandstone and conglomerate (unit C) to calcareous sandstone and shale (unit D). McCulloch and others (1979) suggest that this unit may be the offs T e equivalent of the
«
Careaga Sandstone of the Santa Maria ba. -a. Unit D - This unit is a package of acoustically continuous/ high-
amplitude reflectors. The base is difficult to define/ and is based on seismic travel time; it lies at a depth of nearly 1.2 sec (2-way travel time) beneath the sea floor. The unit is represented in the COST well by a calcareous siltstone that McCulloch and others (1979) suggest may be the offshore equivalent of the Foxen Mudstone of middle (?) to late Pliocene age. Unit E - This unit is comparable to unit D in acoustic character. It contains high-amplitude/ continuous reflectors that are slightly distorted near the base. The base of the unit is defined by a very high-amplitude reflector that marks the surface of the acoustic basement in our profiles. This surface lies at a depth of nearly 1.7 sec (2-way travel time) beneath the sea floor/ and in the COST well is represented by an interval of chert. This unit is predominately calcareous shale and siltstone with interbeds of sandstone. McCulloch and others (1979) suggest that this unit may be partly equivalent to the Sisquoc Formation of late Miocene to early Pliocene age in the Santa Maria Basin.
48

Geologic Structure The most significant structural features in the Point Conception area are
low-angle reverse or thrust faults (pi. 15). These faults generally trend northwest in the northwestern part of the region, swinging to a westerly orientation in the southeast part. Three or more major thrust sheets or nappes are defined by these faults. The complexity of surficial and subsurface structure varies significantly between these nappes.
The small, westward thrust nappe in the northwestern part of the study area contains the most severly deformed (folded and faulted) sediments in the region. The western boundary of the nappe is composed of several thrust faults that dip eastward. These faults merge to form a single, major, through-going fault to the southeast. This major fault lies just east of, and parallel to a flat surfaced basement high that joins the Santa Lucia Bank to the north with the Channel Islands platform to the south. At its southeastern end, near Point Conception, this fault trends almost east. This thrust fault is seen in the seismic reflection profiles as a curving fault plane, convex to the east, that offsets late Pliocene sedimentary rocks. This fault displaces the base of acoustic unit C, and extends upward into the sedimentary sequence compressing this unit into an anticlinal fold.
Near the western margin of this nappe, northwest-trending anticlines and synclines that are parallel or sub-parallel to the bounding thrust fault are concentrated within unit C and the older sedimentary rocks of the nappe. West of this bounding thrust fault, Pliocene and older sedimentary rocks caught between the nappe and the basement high are also faulted and folded.
Five heads of Arguello Canyon cut across this nappe; all of these are constructional canyons with well developed levees. These levees are mainly
49

restricted to the nappe and do not extend onto the shelf to the east or, with the exception of perhaps one, across the western boundary faults. Only one other leveed canyon head is found in this region, and this is located southwest of Point Conception.
The largest nappe in the study area is bounded on the west by a major through-going thrust fault that parallels the basement high just northwest of the Channel Islands platform. Except for minor faults and folds, this nappe has little superimposed structure. The frontal thrust fault displaces late Pliocene sediments (unit C) in the west, and Quaternary sediments (both units A and B) in the east. In the seismic reflection records the fault appears as a gently east-dipping plane associated with normal faulting and contorted bedding in the vicinity of the thrust (fig. 5). Two high-angle reverse or normal faults appear to continue uninterrupted along an easterly trend for over 20 km near the shelf break just offshore from the coastline immediately southeast of Point Conception. These faults are parallel or subparallel to the frontal thrust of the nappe and are downthrown to the north; locally they offset the sea floor. Short, discontinuous folds on the shelf north of these faults appear to parallel the trend of the faults.
The third nappe is located between the other two thrust sheets, just offshore between Point Arguello and Point Conception. This nappe has a nearly east-trending thrust fault boundary that joins the thrust forming the southern boundary of the nappe to the north. The thrust fault offsets sedimentary rocks of late Pliocene age (unit C). With the exception of a few discontinuous faults and folds, this nappe has little superimposed structure. However, several fairly continuous, northwest-trending folds and faults disrupt late Pliocene to early Pleistocene sediments on the shelf landward
50

(northeast) of the nappe. Near the shelf break, a northwest-trending normal or high angle reverse fault, downdropped to the south, offsets the sea floor and appears to truncate the bounding thrust faults of the central and northern nappes.
A Pleistocene angular unconformity that is well defined in the seismic reflection profiles crops out on the sea floor near the scarp marking the shelf edge at a 100 m depth (pi. 17). This surface trace of this unconfornity extends from the northern part of the study area around Point Conception to the southeast. The outcrop of this unconformity is fairly continuous, but it is locally dislocated by faults mapped near the shelf break.
Bedrock crops out on the shelf in the vicinity of Point Arguello and Point Conception, as well as on the western part of the shelf that extends eastward from Point Conception. Bedrock is not exposed on the slope, except locally near the 100 m isobath. The north slope of Santa Barbara Basin and the adjacent continental slope are covered with Quaternary sediment, much of which is slowly moving downslope.
Structure of the Point Conception region suggests that the area has undergone east-west compression. At least three imbricate thrust sheets or nappes were pushed westward during late Pliocene time. Sea-floor displacement along some conjugate faults and possible offset of Quaternary sediments (units A and B) suggest that thrusting of these nappes continues today. Compressive forces associated with strike slip along th^ San Andreas fault appear to have resulted in decoupling of late Tertiary bedrock from older basement rocks. The basement high that joins the Santa Lucia Bank and Channel Islands platform appears to have acted as a resistant barrier against which younger rocks were
51

upthrust. The most northerly of the three nappes appears to have undergone the
greatest compression, as late Neogene sediments within the thrust sheet are more extensively folded and faulted than in any of the other nappes. Strata immediately west of the bounding thrust, in front of the nappe, have been compressed against the basement high and faulted at lov; angles from the westward thrusting (pi. 15). The presence of leveed submarine canyons on the surface of the nappe suggests uplift in the adjacent region. Constructional (leveed) submarine canyons are uncommon in the shallow waters of the upper slope, and characteristically occur near the base of the continental slope or rise, or on the flat ocean floor where sediment laden currents lose energy. However, during Pleistocene time a heavily sediment laden river debouched on the flat coastal plain in the present area of this nappe, where the levees were constructed from overbank flow during times of flooding.
The other two nappes within the study area are much less deformed thai is the nappe described above. The lack of complex superimposed structure on these two nappes suggests that compressional forces were not as great here as farther north, or that thrusting was initiated in the north so that the more northerly nappe has undergone thrusting for a longer tine.
The evidence from seismic reflection records studied for this report largely reflects late Tertiary tectonic activity. However, deep-penetration, CDP multi-channel seismic reflection records show evidence of early Tertiary thrusting as well (D. S. McCulloch, oral commun., 1979). Lower to middle Tertiary sedimentary rocks were decoupled from older basement and thrust westward against a basement high on the outer shelf during a period of eastwest compression. The area immediately south of Point Conception is located
52

on the largest and most southerly nappe mapped in the region. Structures superimposed on this nappe along the outer slope are relatively simple; however, structures on the shelf are more complex, suggesting that compressive forces may be active there today. A south-dipping thrust fault trends parallel to the coastline in this area and appears to disrupt Quaternary sediments that cover the outer shelf. Also, a fairly continuous fault appears to have controlled the development of the shelf break in this region. Sidescan sonographs and high-resolution seismic reflection profiles suggest that channels incised into the shelf are structurally controlled by faults. Consequently, we believe that the shelf and slope physiography and geology in the general vicinity of Point Conception reflect the same dynamic tectonic processes that have formed the major thrust sheets and compressional structures in the Santa Ynez Mountains.
Seismicity The distribution of instrumentally recorded (post-1932) seismicity in the
Santa Barbara Channel region is well characterized by the 1970 - 1975 instrumental record relocated and analyzed by Lee and others (1979). That study shows that post-1970 seismicity in the study area is relatively sparse. Epicenters and hypocenters west of 120°JO'w and north of 34°45'N are poorly located because of an inadequate network coverage. East and south of these boundaries well-located earthquakes and well constrained fault-plane solutions can be associated geometrically with specific east-trending reverse faults such as the Mid-channel, Pitas Point-Ventura, Red Mountain, and Anacapa faults (Yerkes and others, 1980). These faults show fairly uniform steeply north-dipping slip vectors in contrast to the few semi-constrained solutions
53

for the area to the west, which indicate gently east-plunging slip vectors. Two large historic earthquakes have occurred in the general western Santa
Barbara channel region. One event, located somewhere in the western Transverse Ranges, occurred December 21, 1812, and h an estimated magnitude
*
of 7 to 7.5. The other was a M7.3 temblor that occur.*-^d November 4, 1927 along or near the Arguello-North Channel slope (Yerkes and others, 1980). Both epicenters are poorly located. The 1927 earthquake has been intensively studied in recent years because of its relevance to coastal deformation northwest of Point Arguello. Three alternative locations for the 1927 event and two alternate locations for the 1312 event are shown on Plate 18; one other alternate location for the 1812 event is located off the map, due east of the study area in the central part of the Santa Barbara Channel (Yerkes and others, 1980, Sheet 1).
Relatively little is known about the earthquake of 1812, which consisted of 2 large magnitude events that occurred within 30 minutes of each other, and severely damaged mission structures at San Fernando, San Buenaventura (Ventura), Santa Barbara, Santa Ynez, and Purisima (near Lotnpoc). Yerkes and others (1980) state that a moderate tsunami was associated with the earthquakes indicating that the events were centered somewhere in the Uanta Barbara Channel and that dip slip or landsliding occurred at the sea floor.
Little more is known about the location of the 1927 epicenter. However, investigators have recently concluded that the epicenter was much closer to shore, 25 km or less, than the originally estimated distance of 80 km (Gawthrop, 1978a; Smith, 1978; Hanks, 1979). A seismic sea wave was reported to have been associated with this earthquake as well (Wood and others, 1960, p. 34). The presence of a tsunami indicates that dip slip or submarine
54

landsliding occurred on the sea floor. Teleseisraic first-motion data and analysis of distortion of a large geodetic quadrilateral on the coastal mainland are consistent with thrust faulting, rather than strike slip on a northwest-trending fault such as the offshore Lompoc fault (Hanks, 1979; Savage and Prescott, 1978; Yerkes and others, 1980, sheet 1). This reverse fault displays evidence of more than 152 m of Holocene displacement and is associated with deformation of the sea floor (Yerkes and others, 1980).
The mapped distribution of epicenters for the period 1932 - 1978, both onshore and offshore, is random and generally shows little or no preferred orientation or correlation with mapped faults (pi. 18). This distribution is most likely the result of poor coverage by the seismographic network in this region. However, several clusters of epicenters occur in significant locations. Epicenters are concentrated along a fairly large area on the Santa Lucia Bank in the northwest part of the study area (pi. 18). Although no faults are shown in this area, perhaps because of the paucity of marine geophysical data there, these events may be associated with deep faulting within the bedrock ridge.
Another smaller, tightly spaced cluster of epicenters is located on the nearshore shelf immediately west of Point Conception. These events appear to be associated with Holocene faulting that is active on the shelf. A firstmotion solution (G-ll, pi. 18) for one of the events indicates an inferred westward thrusting on an eastward-plunging slip vector (Gawthrop, 1978b). Two other fault-plane solutions in the western Santa Barbara channel indicate active thrust faulting. A solution calculated by Gawthrop (1978b) from a seismic event along the eastern edge of the bedrock ridge (G-17, pi. 18) also indicates an inferred eastward-plunging slip vector that was probably
55

associated with movement along the fairly continuous thrust fault that bounds the bedrock ridge. The other solution is from an event that occurred along the western flank of the Santa Barbara Basin and shows an inferred northplunging slip vector (Lee and others, 1979). This event may have been associated with reverse movement along the Mid-channel fault (pi. 18).
Seafloor Instability Areas of potential sea floor instability usually are mapped by the
identification of features thought to characterize submarine slides and rotational slumps, and downslope sediment creep on seismic reflection profiles. All of these forms of downslope mass movement are present in the western Santa Barbara Channel-Point Conception offshore area (pi. 16). The liquefaction of bottom sediments may also contribute to sea-floor instability. However, at present, our knowledge of the engineering properties of sediments in the western Santa Barbara Channel region is not sufficient to assess their liquefaction potential.
A large volume of sediment has been deposited within the western Santa Barbara Basin and along the slope seaward of Point Arguello and Point Conception since middle Tertiary time. Unstable sea-floor conditions are generally restricted to these areas of relatively rapid sedimentation and they are characterized by the presence of slumps and landslides, probable downslope sediment creep, buried channels, and levees (pis. 16 and 17).
Submarine Slides, Slumps and Sediment Creep. Several submarine slides and slumps are present within the headward tributaries of Arguello Canyon and along the lower boundaries of some areas of sediment creep (pi. 16). Submarine slides, including a buried slide, and rotational slumps also are
56

mapped by Yerkes and ot i-^rs (1980) as covering a large area along the south slope of the Santa Barbara Channel in the extreme eastern part of the study area (pi. 16). Moreover, folded and contorted bedding in the shallow subsurface indicate that slope deposits in this area have been unstable throughout Pleistocene and Holocene time.
Sediment creep appears to be fairly widespread along the slope immediately offshore of Point Arguello and Point Conception (pi. 16). This area of creep is closely associated with levees and buried channels that in turn reflect rapid sedimentation, probably during Pleistocene time. This history has created a large area that is characterized by relatively unstable sea-floor conditions.
Buried and Active Channels. Both shallowly and deeply buried channels are mapped within the area of probable sediment creep, along the Point Arguello-Point Conception slope (pi. 16). Many of these channels are directly beneath or are closely associated with present-day tributaries to Arguello Canyon. These features reflect a period of active erosion and deposition during Pleistocene time.
Modern sediment transported along the shelf and slope of the Point Conception region reaches the deep-sea floor principally through Arguello Canyon. In addition, tributaries to Arguello Canyon as well as other submarine channels carry sediment southward from the Santa Lucia Bank, westward from the Point Conception shelf and the western Santa Barbara sill, southward from the San Miguel and Santa Rosa Islands platform and from the area of Rodriguez seamount (pi. 16). These channels are identified principally from bathymetry and most are of minor significance as conduits for sediment transport. However, the five tributaries of Arguello Canyon that
57

notch the distal edge of the shelf off Point Conception appear to be major sediment conduits/ and probably most of the modern sediment carried across the shelf is swept into the Arguello Canyon system, through which it is then carried to the continental rise and abyssal plain.
Levees. Six well defined submarine-channel Ievee55 have been mapped on the upper slope west of Point Conception (pi. 16). Most of these are located due west of Point Arguello where they are associated with the active tributaries to Arguello Canyon. These features probably were constructed by overbank flows of currents that were heavily laden with sediment during periods of rapid downslope transport, most likely during Pleistocene time. These levees are found unusually high on the continental slope, as levees are generally found near the base of the slope or rise where sediment-laden currents lose energy. As noted previously, the presence of levees on the upper slope may reflect the tectonic elevation of features that were constructed at greater depths.
The relative lack of consolidation and fine grain size of the sediment characteristic of levees, and the relatively steep slopes underlying levees in this area suggest that these deposits may be potentially unstable. Watersaturated fine sand and silt in such levees, especially when situate,! in a. tectonically active region such as the Point Conception area, probably are prone to liquefaction and their engineering properties should be carefully studied before any statement is made concerning their stability.
Unconsolidated Sediment. An isopach map of acoustically transparent, water-saturated shelf deposits inferred to be unconsolidated and Quaternary in age was constructed from high-resolution Uniboom and 3.5 kHz seismic reflection profiles collected for this investigation (pi. 17). This map is
58

limited to areas on the continental shelf where an unconformity of Pleistocene age made the correlation of younger deposits possible. This unconformity could not be identified on the adjacent slope, and Quaternary sediments could not be identified and correlated with confidence. The thickness of Quaternary sediment on the continental shelf varies from zero near the shelf break and along bedrock outcrops in the vicinity of Point Conception to more than 15 meters. Quaternary deposits are thickest beneath the shallow shelf area between Point Arguello and Purisima Point.
Hydrocarbon Seepage and Shallow Gas Accumulations Two areas of possible offshore oil or gas seepage were identified and
mapped on the basis of water column anomalies on high resolution seismic reflection records. One area is southwest of Point Conception and the other is west and northwest of Point Arguello (pi. 16). These apparent seeps are restricted to the nearshore shelf where Tertiary bedrock is fractured by many short/ discontinuous faults/ some of which displace Pleistocene and holocene sediment.
Bedrock Geology Most of the Point Conception study area is covered by undifferentiated
Quaternary and late Tertiary sediments (pi. 15). Bedrock crops out in two locations; one along the nearshore shelf just east of Point Arguello and continuing eastward around Point Conception to the eastern limit of the study area/ and the other on the San Miguel Island platform (pi. 15). These rocks have been planed by erosion since Pleistocene time/ and today most Holocene sediment carried to the shelf in this area is swept from this bedrock surface
59

and deposited beyond the shelf break. Miocene sedimentary rock (Monterey Formation?) is the principal bedrock
type that crops out on the Point Conception shelf. In this area Miocene sedimentary rocks are folded and faulted and have a .t sterly structural trend. The wave-planed bedrock platform that surrounds San Miguel Island is composed of a core of Paleocene and Eocene sedimentary rock unconformably overlain by Miocene sedimentary rock (pi. 15). Similar to the exposed bedrock off Point Conception, these rocks are folded and faulted and exhibit a general easterly structural trend.
Extending northwestward from the western end of the Channel Islands platform is a shallowly buried subsurface bedrock and basement ridge that appears to connect the Channel Islands platform with Santa Lucia Bank (pi. 15). This ridge may consist of Franciscan basement rock overlain by early to middle Tertiary sedimentary rock that is in turn covered with a relatively thin veneer of Quaternary-Tertiary (undifferentiated) sediment. Coaplex folds and faults bisect this ridge in the vicinity of Arguello submarine canyon, possibly the result of tectonic bending.
Miocene (?) volcanic rocks form Rodriguez Seamount, located approximately 50 km west of Sari Miguel Island, and appear to be exposed on the sea floor in an area that lies along an east-west line between San Miguel Island and Rodriguez Seamount (pi. 15). Volcanic rocks of Miocene age also crop oat on San Miguel Island and on the seafloor around the east end of the island. These volcanic rocks are aligned in an east-west direction and may connect at depth to a common volcanic ridge that underlies the Channel Islands platform.
60

Summary of Hazards The most significant geologic hazard identified in the western Santa
Barbara Channel-Point Conception area is seafloor instability. Highresolution seismic reflection data indicate that the upper slope offshore of Point Arguello and Point Conception is probabl/ the site of active downslope sediment creep. Many tributaries to Arguello submarine canyon dissect this area, and submarine levee deposits, slumps, and incipient slumps indicative of unstable seafloor conditions are present.
Faults and earthquakes are also hazards of significance. Seismic reflection data collected from the Point Conception region show that faulting is extensive. Many faults are reverse or thrust faults, and displacements of the seafloor and of Quaternary sediment indicate that many faults are active. Recent faulting, along with historical records of major earthquakes in the region, indicate that the western Santa Barbara Channel is tectonically active and coulc! be the site of severe seisnic events in the future.
Additional data are required for a comprehensive assessment of potential geological hazards in the western Santa Barbara channel region. In particular, data gaps exist concerning seismicity, hydrocarbon seepage, the liquefaction potential of unconsolidated sediment, and the tsunami hazard related to seismicity in this area.
61

References cited
Agnew, D.C., 1979, Tsunami history of San Diego, in Abbott, P.L. and W.J. Elliott, eds., Earthquakes and other perils, San Diego region: San Diego Association of Geologists Guidebook, pp. 117-122.
Agnew, D.C., M. Legg, and C. Strand, 1979, Earthquake history of Sari Diego, in Abbott, P.L. and W.J. Elliott, eds., Earthquakes and other perils, San Diego region: San Diego Association of Geologists Guidebook, p. 123-133.
Arnal, R.E. 1976, Miocene paleobathymetric changes of the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge area, California continental borderland, in Howell, D.G., ed. , Aspects of the geologic history of the California continental borderland: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Pacific Section, Miscellaneous Publication 24, p. 60-79.
Bandy, O.L., J.C. Ingle, and J.M. Resig, 1964, Facies trends, San Pedro Bay, California: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 75, p. 403-424.
Barnes, P.W., 1970, Marine geology and oceanography of Santa Cruz basin off southern California: University of Southern California, Department of Geological Sciences Report USC-GEOL 70-3, 175 p.
Barrows, A.G., 1974, A review of the geology and earthquake history of the Newport-Inglewood structural zone, southern California: California Division of Mines and Geology Special Report 114, 155 p.
Bernard, B.3., Brooks, J.M. and Sackett, W.M., 1976, Natural gas seepage in the Gulf of Mexico: Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 31, p. 4854.
Blanc, R.P. and G.B. Cleveland, 1968, Natural slope stability as related to geology, San Clemente area, Orange and San Diego Counties, California: California Division of 'lines and Geology Special Report 98, 19 p.
Blatt, Harvey, Middleton, G.V., and Murray, R.C., 1972, The origin of sedimentary rocks: Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 634 p.
Claypool, G.E., and I.R. Kaplan, 1974, The origin of methane in marine sediments, in Kaplan, I.R., ed., Natural gases in marine sediments: Plenum Press, New York, N.Y., p. 94-129.
Clements, T. and K.O. Emery, 1947, Seismic activity and topography of the sea floor off southern California: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 37, p. 309-313.
Coffman, J.L. and C.A. von Hake, 1973, Earthquake history of the United States: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Publication 411, Washington, 208 p.
62

Cole, M.R. , 1970, Paleo^urrent and basin analyses on San Nicolas Island, California: Ohio University unpublished Masters Thesis, 110 p.
Cole, M.R., 1977, Eocene paleocurrents and sedimentation, San Nicolas Island, California: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 61, no. 2, p. 237-247.
Cook, N.E., editor, 1979, Geologic studies of the Point Conception deep stratigraphic test well OCS-CAL 78-164 No. 1, outer continental shelf, southern California, United States: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 79-1218, 148 p.
Dames & Moore, 1978, Preliminary geotechnical investigation offshore, beach, and seacliff areas proposed LNG marine Terminal Point Conception, California report for Western LNG Terminal Associates: Los Angeles, California, Dames & Moore, Job Nos. 0011-207-02 and 0011-209-02.
Dott, R.G., Jr., 1963, Dynamics of subaqueous gravity depositional processes: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 47, no. 1, p. 104-128.
Edgington, W.G., 1974, Geology of the Dana Point Quadrangle, Orange County, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Special Report 109, 31 p.
Edwards, B.D., M.E. Field, and E.G. Clukey, 1980, Geological and geotechnical analyses of a submarine slump, California borderland: Proceedings of the 12th Annual Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, paper no. OTC 3726, p. 399-410.
Emery, K.O., 1952, Continental shelf sediments of southern California: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 63, p. 1105-1108.
Emery, K.O. 1960, Basin plains and aprons off southern California: Journal of Geology, v. 68, p. 464-479.
Emery, K.O. and D. Hoggan, 1958, Gases in marine sediments: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 42, no. 9, p. 2174-2188.
Emery, K.O. and S.C. Rittenberg, 1952, Early diagenesis of California basin sediments in relation to origin of oil: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 36, p. 735-806.
Field, Il.E. and S.H. Clarke, Jr., 1979, Small-scale slumps and slides and their significance for basin slope processes, southern California borderland, in Doyle, L.J. and O.H. Pilkey, editors, Geology of continental slopes: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists Special Publication 27, p. 223-230.
63

Field, M.E. and B.D. Edwards, 1980, Slopes of the southern California continental borderland: a regime of mass transport, jLn_ Field, M.E., A.H. Bouma, I.P. Colburn, R.G. Douglas, and J.C. Ingle, editors, Quaternary depositional environments of the Pacific Coast: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Pacific Section, Pacific Coast Paleogeography Symposium 4, Los Angeles, California, p. 169-184.
Field, M.E. and W.C. Richmond, 1980, Sedimentary and structural patterns on northern Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge, southern California: Marine Geology, v. 34, p. 79.
Friedman, M.E., J.H. Whitcomb, C.R. Alien, and J.A. Hileman, 1976, Seismicity of the southern California region, 1 January 1972 to 31 December 1974: California Institute of Technology, Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences Contribution 2734, 404 p.
Gawthrop, W.H., 1975, Seismicity of the central California coastal region: U.S. Geological Survey Open File report 75-134, 87 p.
Gawthrop, W.H., 1978a, The 1927 Lompoc California earthquake: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 68, p. 1705-1716.
Gawthrop, W.H., 1978b, Seismicity and tectonics of the central California coastal region, in Silver, E.A. and Normark, W.R., editors, San GregorioHosgri fault zone, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Special Report 137, p. 45-56.
Gorsline, D.S., 1980, Sedimentologic history and characteristics of continental margin basins, California borderland: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 64, p. 442-443.
Gorsline, D.S. and D.J. Grant, 1972, Sediment textural patterns on San Pedro shelf, California (1951-1971), _in_ Swift, D.J.P., D.P. Duane, and O.K. Pilkey, editors, Shelf sediment transport: Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, Inc., Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, p. 575-600.
Greene, h.G., W.H.K. Lee, D.S. McCulloch, and E.E. Bragge, 1973, Faults and earthquakes in the Monterey Bay region, California: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Investigation Map MF-518.
Greene, H.G., S.H. Clarke, Jr., M.E. Field, F.I. Linker, and H.C. Wagner, 1975, Preliminary report on the environmental geology of selected areas of the southern California continental borderland: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 75-596, 69 p.
Greene, H.G., S.C. Wolf, and K.G. Blom, 1978, The marine geology of the eastern Santa Barbara Channel with particular emphasis on the groundwater basins offshore from the Oxnard Plain, southern California: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 78-305, 104 p.
64

Greene, H.G., S.H. Clarke, Jr., and M.E. Field, 1979, Environmental geology of the southern California borderland: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1150, p. 147.
Gutenberg, B., 1943, Earthquakes and structure in southern California: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 54, no. 4, p. 499-526.
Hall, R.W. and H.R. Ensiminger, editors, 1979, Potential geologic hazards and constraints for blocks in proposed mid-Atlantic OCS oil and gas lease sale 49: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 79-264.
Hampton, M.A. and A.H. Bouma, 1977, Slope instability near the shelf break, western Gulf of Alaska: Marine Geotechnology, v.2, p. 309-322.
Hanks, T.C., 1979, The Lompoc, California earthquake (November 4, 1927; M=7.3) and its aftershocks: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 69, no.2, p. 451-462.
Harding, T.P., 1973, Newport-Inglewood trend, California - an example of wrenching style of deformation: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 57, no. 1, p. 97-116.
Heezen, B.C. and C.L. Drake, 1964, Grand Banks slump: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 48, p. 221-225.
Henry, M.V., 1976, The unconsolidated sediment distribution on the San Diego County mainland shelf, California: San Diego State University unpublished iMasters Thesis.
Hileman, J.A. , 1979, Seismicity of the San Diego region, _in_ Abbott, P.L. and W.J. Elliott, editors, Earthquakes and other perils, San Diego Region: San Diego Association of Geologists Guidebook, p. 11-20.
Hileman, J.A., C.R. Alien, and J.M. Nordquist, 1973, Seismicity of the southern California region, 1 January 1932 to 31 December 1972: California Institute of Technology, Division of Geology and Planetary Sciences Contribution number 2385, 404 p.
Howell, D.G., C.J. Stuart, J.P. Platt, and D.J. aill, 1974, Possible strikeslip faulting in the southern California borderland: Geology, v. 2, p. 93-98.
Jennings, C.W., 1973, State of California preliminary fault and geologic map: California Division of Mines and Geology preliminary report 13.
Jennings, C.W. 1977, Geologic map of California: California Geologic Data Map Series, California Division of Mines and Geology, scale 1:750,000.
Karl, H.A., 1976, Processes influencing transportation and deposition of sediment on the continental shelf, southern California: University of Southern California unpublished doctoral thesis, 331 p.
65

Karl, H.A., Cacchione, D.A., and Drake, D.E., 1980, Erosion and transport of sediments and pollutants in the benthic boundary layer on the San Pedro shelf, southern California: U.S. Geological Survey Open File Report 80386, 54 p.
Kennedy, M.P. , 1975, Geology of the San Diego metropolitan area, California Division of Mines and Geology, Bulletin 200, p. " -39.
ft
Kennedy, M.P., E.E. Welday, G. Borchardt, T.W. Chase, .nd R.H. Chapman, 1977, Studies on surface faulting and liquefaction as potential earthquake hazards in urban San Diego, California: California Division of Mines and Geology final technical report submitted to U.S. Geological Survey (USG3 Contract number 14-08-0001-15858, 52 p.
Lee, W.h.K. and J.G. Vedder, 1973, Recent earthquake activity in the Santa Barbara Channel region: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 63, p. 1757-1773.
Lee, W.H.K., R.F. Yerkes, and M. Simirenko, 1979, Recent earthquake activity and focal mechanisms in the western Transverse Ranges, California: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 799-A, 37 p.
Legg, Mark and U.C. Agnew, 1979, The 1862 earthquake in San Diego, in Abbott, P.L. and W.J. Elliott, editors, Earthquake and other perils, San Diego region: San Diego Association of Geologists Guidebook, p. 139-142.
Legg, Mark and M.P. Kennedy, 1979, Faulting offshore San Diego and northern Baja California, in Abbott, P.L. and W.J. Elliott, editors, Earthquakes and other perils, San Diego Region: Geological Society of America Annual Meeting Guidebook, p. 29-46.
Lewis, K.B., 1971, Slumping on a continental slope inclined at l°-4°: Sedimentology, v. 16, p. 97-110.
McCulloch, D.S., J.G. Vedder, H.C. Wagner, and R.H. Brune, 1979, Geologic setting, in Cook, H.E., editor, Geologic studies of the Point Conception deep stratigraphic test well OCS-CAL 78-164 No. 1 Outer Continental Shelf southern California, United States: U.S. Geological Survey Open-Fila Report 79-1218, p. 10-25.
Menard, H.W., R.F. Dill, E.L. Hamilton, D.G. Moore, G. Shumway, M. Silverman, and H.B. Stewart, 1954, Underwater mapping by diving geologists: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 38, p. 129-147.
MESA2 , Inc. (Marine Environmental Science Associates and Marine Studies, Geosciences Department, California State University, Northridge), 1978, A geophysical and geologic evaluation of the offshore extension of the Santa Ynez fault, South branch, northwestern shelf of the Santa Barbara basin (between Can Augustine and Alegria Creek): report prepared for Dames & Moore, Los Angeles, 19 pp., 5 plates.
66

Mikolaj, P.G. , R.S. Schlueter/ and A.A. Alien, 1972, Investigation of the nature, extent, and fate of natural oil seepage off southern California: Fourth Annual Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, v. 1, p. 365-380.
Miller, R.V. and S.S. Tan, 1976, Geology and engineering geologic aspects of the south half Tusten Quadrangle, Orange County, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Special Report 126, 28 p.
Moody, J.D., and M.J. Hill, 1956, Wrench fault tectonics: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 67, p. 1207-1246.
Moore, D.G., 1954, Submarine geology of San Pedro Shelf: Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 24, p. 162-181.
Moore, D.G., 1960, Acoustic reflection studies of the continental shelf and slope off southern California: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 71, p. 1121-1136.
Moore, D.G., 1961, Submarine slumps: Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 31, p. 343-357.
Moore, D.G., 1969, Reflection profiling studies of the California continental borderland: Structure and quaternary turbidite basins, Geological Society of America Special Paper 107, 142 p.
Morton, P.K., 1974, Geology and engineering geologic aspects of the south half of the Gobernadora Quadrangle, Orange County, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Special Report 111, 30 p.
Morton, P.K., R.V. Miller, and D.L. Fife, 1973, Preliminary geo-environmental maps of Orange County, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Preliminary Report 15, 4 plates.
fiorton, P.K., W.J. Edgington, and D.L. Fife, 1974, Geology and engineering geologic aspects of the San Juan Capistrano Quadrangle, Orange County, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Special Report 112, 64 p.
Nelson, C.H., K.A. Kvenvolden, and E.G. Clukey, 1978, Thermogenic gases in near surface sediments of Norton .^ound, Alaska, in Proceedings of the 10th Annual Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, paper number OTC 3354, p. 2623-2633.
Norris, R.M., 1951, Marine geology of the San Nicolas Island region, California: Scripps Institution of Oceanography unpublished Doctoral Thesis.
Orr, W.L. and K.O. Emery, 1956, Composition of organic matter in marine sediments preliminary data on hydrocarbon distribution in basins off southern California: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 67, p. 1247-1258.
67

Payton, C.E., editor, 1977, Seismic stratigraphy applications to hydrocarbon exploration: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 26, 516 p.
Real, C.R., T.R. Toppazada, and D.L. Parke, 1978, Earthquake catalog of California January 1, 1900 to December 31, 1974: California Division of Maines and Geology Special Publication 52, 15 p.
Richmond, W.C., L.J. Cummings, S. Hamlin, and M. E. Nagaty, 1981, Geological hazards and constraints in the area of proposed OCS oil and gas lease sale 48, southern California: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-307.
Richter, C.F., 1958, Elementary seismology: San Francisco, W.H. Freeman, 768 p.
Sangrey, D.A., 1977, Marine Geotechnology - state of the art: Marine Geotechnology, v. 2, p. 45-80.
Savage, J.C. and W.H. Prescott, 1978, Geodetic control and the 1927 Lompoc, California earthquake: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 68, no. 6, p. 1693-1703.
Shepard, F.P. and Emery, K.O., 1941, Submarine topography off the California coast - canyons and tectonic interpretation: Geological Society America Special Paper 31, 171 p.
Smith, S.W., 1978, Sea floor expression of the 1927 Lompoc earthquake abstract: EOS, American Geophysical Union Transactions, v. 59, no. 12, p. 1128.
Stevenson, R.E., E. Uchupi, and D.S. Gorsline, 1959, Some characteristics of sediments on the mainland shelf of southern California in Oceanographic survey of the continental shelf area of southern California: California State Water Pollution Control Board Publication 20, p. 59-109.
Tan, S.S. and W.J. Edgington, 1976, Geology and engineering geologic aspects of the Laguna Beach Quadrangle, Orange County, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Special Report 127, 32 p.
Toppozada, T.R., Real, C.R., Bezore, S.P., and Parke, D.L., 1979, Compilation of pre-1900 California earthquake history: California Division of Mines and Geology Open-File report OFR 79-6, SAC, 271 p.
Townley, S.D. and M.W. Alien, 1939, Descriptive catalog of earthquakes of the Pacific coast of the United States, 1769-1923: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 29, p. 1-297.
Uchupi, E., 1961, Submarine geology of the Santa Rosa-Cortes Ridge: Journal of Sedimentology and Petrology, v. 31, p. 534-545.
68

Uchupi, E. and R.A.P. ^al, 1963, Sediments of the Palos Verdes shelf, in Clements, T., editor, Essays in marine geology in honor of K.O. Emery: Southern California University Press, p. 171-189.
Van Dorn, W.G., 1979, Theoretical aspects >f tsunamis along tho San Diego coastline, in Abbott, P.L. and W.J. Elliott, editors, Earthquake and other perils, San Diego region: Geological Society of America Annual Meeting guidebook, p. 115-116.
Vedder, J.G., 1970, Precursors and evolution of the name California continental borderland, in_ Howell, D.G., editor, Aspects of the geologic history of the California continental borderland: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Pacific Section, Miscellaneous Publication 24, p. 6-11.
Vedder, J.G. and R.M. Norris, 1963, Geology of San Nicolas Island, California: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 309, 65 p.
Vedder, J.G., L.A. Beyer, Arne Junger, C.W. Moore, A.E. Roberts, J.C. Taylor, and rl.C. Wagner, 1974, Preliminary report on the geology of the continental borderland of southern California: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-624, 34 p.
Vedder, J.G., J.K. Crouch, E.W. Scott, H.G. Greene, D. Cranmer, M. Ibrahim, R.B. Tudor, and G. Vinning, 1980, A summary report of the regional geology, petroleum potential, environmental geology, and operational considerations in the area of proposed lease sale no. 68, offshore southern California: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 80-198, 62 pp.
Weaver, D.W. and D.P. Doerner, 1969, Structural setting, northern Channel Islands, southern California borderland, ^n_ Weaver, D.W., D.P. Doerner, and B. Nolf, Geology of the northern Channel Islands, Pacific Sections, American Association of Petroleum Geologists and Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists Special Publication, figure 14.
Welday, E.E. and J.W. Williams, 1975, Offshore surficial geology of California: California Division of Mines and Geology Map Sheet 26.
Wentworth, C.M., J.I. Ziony, and J.M. Buchanan, 1970, Preliminary geologic environmental map of the greater Los Angeles area, California: U.S. Geological Survey report, TID 25363, 41 p.
Wilcox, R.E., T.P. Harding, and D.R. Seely, 1973, Basic wrench tectonics: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, v. 57, p. 74-96.
Wilkinson, G.R., 1971, California offshore oil and gas seeps: California Division Oil and Gas Summary of Operations, v. 57, no. 1, p. 5-28.
Wimberly, C.S., 1964, Sediments of the southern California mainland shelf: University of Southern California unpublished doctoral thesis.
69

Wolf, S.C., 1975, Seismic reflection profiles, R/V POLARIS, March 1972, offshore southern California, Point Conception cruise: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 75-166, 22 p.
Wood, H.O., N.H. Heck, and R.A. Eppley, 1966, Earthquake history of the United States, Part II, Stronger earthquakes of California and western Nevada: U.S. Department of Commerce, Environmental Science Services Administration, Coast and Geodetic Survey, No. 41-1, revised.
Yerkes, R.F., H.G. Greene, J.C. Tinsley, and R.K. Lajoie, 1980, Seismotectonic setting of the Santa Barbara channel area, southern California: U.S. Geological Survey MF-1169, 1 plate with text, 10 p.
Ziony, J.I., C.M. Wentworth, J.M. Buchanan-Banks, and H.C. Wagner, 1974, Preliminary map showing recency of faulting in coastal southern California: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF585.
70

APPENDIX 1:

Location, Depth, Length and Type of Selected Samples from the southern California Continental Borderland. Stations 1-50 are identified by circle enclosing station number (e.g.MJ) and stations 51-121 are identified by filled triangle (e.g. A) on Plate 3.

Sta Sample Number

Sample Type

Location

Latitude

Longitude

Water

Sample

Depth(m) Length (m)

01 01D2 02 02D1 03 03D1 04 04D1 05 05D1 06 06D1 07 07D1 08 08D1 09 09D1 10 10D1 11 11D1 12 12D1 13 13D1 14 14D1 15 15D1

Dart Core "" "" ""
""

1978 San Pedro Shelf +33° 36. 6'
" +33° 36. 3' +33° 36. 5'
" +33° 35. 8' " +33° 35. 39'
+33° 35. 95' +33° 35. 7' " +33° 35. 35' +33° 33. 01' +33° 32. 5' +33° 35. 89' +33° 35. 38' +33° 35. 47' +33° 39. 65' +33° 39. 36'

-1180 11 .6' 01 .12'
-1180 12 .2' -1180 10 .9' -118° 11 .5' -118° 09 .40' -118° 08 .7' -118° 09 .40' -118° 12 .90' -118o 13 .25' -118° 08 .90' -118o 08 .45' -118o 08 .29' -118° 03 .09' -118o 02 .99'

45 Smear slide only
46 0.19 47 0.18 41 0.48 60 0.21 43 0.17 45 0.17 45 0.53 253 0.40 275 0.54 45 0.17 49 0.18 50 0.185 15 0.16 15 Core Catcher
only

16 16D1

+33° 39.15' 71

-1180 02

17 0.21

Sta Sample Number

Sample Type

Location

Latitude

Longitude

Water

Sample

Depth (m) Length (m)

17 17D1

Dart Core

Shelf off Dana

+33° 23. 34' -117 o 57. 03'

18 13G1 Gravity Core

Point "

+33° 14. 9 1

-117 o 56. 2 1

380 645

0 .23 1 .95

19 19G1 20 20G1

ii ii

ii

+33° 20. 3 1 +33° 19. 5 1

-117 o 56. 07' -117 o 56. 99'

579 655

1 .51 1 .73

21 21G1 22 22G1 23 23G1 24 24G1

ii ii

ii

+33° 21. 47' -117 o 50. 17'

+33° 21. 47' -117 0 50. 55'

" " 3an Diego Shelf +33° 19. 72' -117 o 37. 73'

i. ..

..

+33 o 20. 16' -117 o 36. 70'

639 1 .52 622 1 .90 234 0 .46
62 Core Catcher

25 25G1 26 26G2 27 27G1

ii ii
.i ii n

ii
.. H

+ 32 <> 41. 21' +32 o 41. 25' +3?° 43. 3 1

-117 o 22. 5 1 -117° 22. 60' -117 o 28. 5 1

290 303 530

1 .25 1 .40 2 .15

28 28G1 29 29D1

.i n
Dart Core

n
"

+32 o 43. 6 1 +32° 46. 9 1

-117 o 28. 2 1 -117 o 21. 24'

543
0
7.8

2 .08 0 .155

30 30D1

+32° 50. 9'

-117 0 19. 2'

393 0 .45

31 31D1 32 32G1

ii n
Gravity Core

n
"

+32 o 50. 05' +32° 53. 10'

-117° 19. 2' -117 o 17. 80'

57 326

0 .255
1 .93

33 33G1

.i ..

..

+32 o 53. 7 1

-117° 17. 7V

393

1 .12

34 34G1

n .1

n

+32 o 52. 35' -117 o 20. 08'

196

0 .63

72

Sta Sample Number

Sample Type

Location

Latitude

Longitude

Water

Sample

Depth (m) Length (m)

35

35G1

Gravity Core San Diego Shelf +32° 53. 9'

-117° 24. 95'

36 36G1

ii ii

ii

+32 o 54. 13' -117° 24. 67'

575 588

2. 16 2. 03

37 37G1

ii ii

ii

+32° 55. 52' -117° 21. 47'

492

1. 84

38 38D1

Dart Core

"

+32° 52. 5'

-117° 21. 05'

315

0. 55

39 39D1

ii ii

ii

+32° 52. 19' -117° 21. 7'

322 0. 41

40 40D1

ii n

ii

+320 50. 08' -117° 22. 47'

314

0. 50

41 41D1 42 42D1

ii n

n

+ 32 o 50. 19 1 +32 o 49. 94»

-117° 23. 44' -117° 23. 8'

383 415

0. 45 0. 50

43 43D1

nn

n

+ 330 49. 70' -117° 24. 04'

435

0. 23

44 44D1

n ..

n

+32 o 49. 18' -117° 24. 78'

475

0. 35

45 45G1

Gravity Core

"

+32° 48. 91' -117° 24. 73'

495

1. 68

46 46G1 47 47G1

11 " San Nicolas

nn

Island n

+33° 07. 00' + 33 o 09. 95'

-119° 33. 10' -119° 30. 05'

935 770

0. 19 0. 56

48 48G1

n i.

n

+3 30 08. OO 1 -119° 30. 80'

9bO

0. 63

49 49G1

+ 33 o 05. 38' -119° 32. 71'

705

1. 50

50 50G1

nn

n

+330 04. 84' -119° 33. 11'

371 Core Catcher

73

Sta Sample Number

Sample Type

Location

Latitude

Longitude

Water

Sample

Depth (m) Length (m)

1979

51

51G1

Gravity Core Gulf of Santa

+33° 21. 34' -117° 59. 53'

51 51G2

Catalina Lasuen Knoll

+33° 21. 64' -117° 59. 25'

52 52G 53 53G

""

"

+33° 21. 89' +33° 24. 43'

-117° 58. 77' -118° 02. 05'

54 54G

+33° 24, 23' -118° 02. 47'

55 55G3

+33° 27. 49' -118° 03. 24'

56 56G 57 57G

""

San Pedro Basin

+33° 29. 59' +33° 29. 24'

-118° 15. 37' -118° 1". 27'

58 58G 59 59G1

San Peclro Shelf

+33° 39. 93' +33° 39. 74'

-118° 13. 88' -118° 13. 53'

59 59G2

n ..

..

+330 39. 62' -118° 13. 70'

60 60G 62 62G

+33° 38. 42' +33° 37. 99'

-118° 13. 53' -118° 12. 47'

63 63G

+33° 34. 66' -118° 08. 43'

64 64G 65 65P 65 65G

Piston Core San Mateo

Point

Gravity Core

"

+33° 35. 04' +33° 19. 60' +33° 19. 36'

-118° 09. 02' -117° 43. 50' -117° 43. 78'

719 1. 8 686 1. 97 560 1. 03 555 1. 46 692 1. 2 422 "small recovery" 847 1. 8 787 1. 45 023 0. 36 022 0. 46 022 c.c. only 036 c.c. only 035 0. 44 075 c.c. only U58 c.c. only 727 2. 03 732 1. 53

74

Sta Sample Number
66 66G 66 66P 67 67P 67 67G 68 68G1 68 68G2 69 69G1 69 69G2 69 69G3 70 70G2 71 71D1 71 71D2 72 72D 73 73D 74 74D 75 75G 76 76G 77 77G2

Sample Type

Location

Gravity Core Piston Core

San Mateo Point "

Gravity Core

"

.. .. M
.1 ,, Dart Core

.1 .. ..
Las Flores Shelf

ii ..

.1

Gravit/ Core Gulf of Santa Catalina

Latitude
+33 0 20. 57' +33 0 20. 55' +33 0 20. 57' +33 0 20. 62' +33 o 19. 02'
+33 o la. 92'
+33 0 17. 88' +33 o 17. 61' +33 o 17. 82' +33 o 17. 70' +33 o 16. 83' +33 o 16. 83' +33 0 16. 67' +33 0 16. 66' +330 16. 46' +33 o 06. 87' + 33 0 06. 55' +33 o 06- 46'

Longitude
-117° 42. 58' -117° 42. 65' -117° 43. 02' -117° 42. 98' -117° 41. 28' -117° 41. 30' -117° 42. 62' -117° 42. 35' -117° 42. 43' -117° 42. 87' -117° 34. 22' -117° 34. 22' -117° 34. 12' -117° 33. 99' -117° 33. 86' -117° 46. 10' -117° 46. 19' -117° 45. 78'

Water Depth (m)
607 617 662 656 642 633 730 730 733 754 071 072 073 070 072 827 843 790

Sample Length (m)
2. 57 3. 89 2. 78 2. 41 2. 47 2. 24 2. 34 2. 37 2. 57 0. 94 0. 20 0. 30 0. 30 0. 30 0. 36
I. 85
0. 43
1. 69

75

Sta Sample Number

Sample Type

Location

Latitude

Longitude

Water

Sample

Depth ( m ) Length (m)

78 78G 79 79G

Gravity Core Gulf of Santa Catalina

+33° 06. 05' +33° 05. 71'

-117° 44. 39' -117° 45. 55'

762 844

1. 80 0. 73

80 80G

+ 33° 05. 77' -117° 45. 33'

822

0. 85

81 81G

nn

n

+330 04. 60' -117° 44. 93'

850

0. 69

02 82G

+330 04. 74' -117° 44. 34'

788 1. 37

83 83G

nn

n

+33° 04. 89' -117° 44. 20

730 1. 25

84 84G

+ 33° 04. 98' -117° 43. 82'

700 1. 58

85 85G 86 86G

nn
., ,.

n
.

+32° 53. 16'
+32. 58. 06'

-117° 35. 36' -117° 35. 35'

731 1. 68 747 1. 61

87 87G

nn

..

+ 32 o 58. 13' -117° 35. 25'

748 1. 64

88 88G 89 89G

""

San Jiego Trough

+32° 51. 76' +32° 51. 44'

-117° 43. 20' -117° 43. 22 '

1070 1076

1. 85 1. 14

90 90P

Piston Core

"

+32° 49. 53' -117° 41. 53'

1065

0. 34

90 90G

Gravity Core

"

+32° 49. 52' -117° 41. 51'

1066

2. 30

91 91G1 91 91G2

nn

n

+32° 49. 22' + 32° 49. 31'

-117° 41. 78' -117° 41. 77'

1080 1000

0. 38 0. 40

92 92G 93 93G

" " Gulf of Santa
Catalina n

+32° 50. 47' +32 o 50. 28'

-117° 31. 28' -117° 31. 42'

840 2. 31 845 48

76

Sta Sample Number

Sample Type

Location

Latitude

Longitude

Water

Sample

Depth (n) Length (m)

94 94G 95 95G

Gravity Core ^ulf of Santa Catalina

+32° 51. 84' -1-32 ° 51. 50'

-117° 28. 45' -117° 28. 34'

684 1. 93 679 2. 33

96 96G

" " Coronado Bank

+32° 43. 02' -117° 27. 76'

640 2. 42

97 97G1

ii ii

n

+32° 43. 16' -117° 28. 63'

524 1. 66

97 97G2

n ii

n

+32° 43. 15' -117° 28. 53'

555 1. 09

98 98G 99 99G

""

San Diego Trough

+32° 37. 53' -1-32 ° 37. 44'

-117° 33. 99' -117° 33. 51'

1193 1180

2. 20 2. 0

100 100G 101 101G

""

Coronado Bank

+32° 38. 46' +32° 39. 04'

-117° 26. 55' -117° 25. 32'

165 c. c. only 167 0. 29

102 102D2

Dart Core

"

+32° 38. 29' -117° 25. 75'

145 0. 57

103 103G

Gravity Core

"

+32° 39. 45' -117° 24. 72'

355 0. 95

104 104G1

+32° 38. 90' -117° 24. 87'

303 0. 25

104 104G2

n ii

ti

+32° 38. 65' -117° 24. 67'

350 0. 29

104 104G3

nn

n

+32° 38. 43' -117° 24. 54'

332 0. 70

105 105G

nn

n

+32 o 36. 96' -117° 22. 70'

242 L. 50

106 106G 107 107D1

nn
Dart Core

n
"

+ 32 o 36. 75' +32° 36. 59'

-117° 23. 28' -117° 23. 77'

256 1. 03 140 0. 35

77

Sta Sample Number
108 108G 109 109G 110 HOG 111 111G 112 112G 113 113G 114 114G 115 115G 116 116G 117 117G 118 118G 119 119G1 119 119G2 120 120G 121 121G

Sample Type
Gravity Core ii ii

Location
Can Diego Shelf ii

ii ii

ii

Del Mar Shelf
ii ..

ii ii

ii

ii ii

..

ii ii

ii

Carlsbad Shelf & Slope

.1 II

.1

II 1.

.1

Latitude
+32° 37. 57' -1-3 2° 37. 36' +32° 43. 55' +32° 43. 16' +32° 56. 98' +320 56. 82' +32 o 57. 09' +32° 57. 21' +32 o 57. 08' +32° 57. 10' +33° 05. 13' +33° 05. 03' +330 05. 00' +33° 00. 85' +330 00. 54'

Longitude
-117° 20. 69' -117° 21. 42' -117° 19. 58' -117° 20. 00' -117° 19. 26' -117° 19. 39' -117° 19. 08' -117° 18. 80' -117° 19. 02' -117° 19. 06' -117° 22. 79' -117° 22. 95. -117° 23. 03' -117° 26. 04' -117° 26. 19'

Water Depth (m)
162 192 080 089 293 250 193 081 180 186 276 211 207 595 666

Gample Length (m)
0. 71 1. 99 0. 76 0. 20 1. 48 1. 13 1. 83 0. 40 1. 79 1. 56 1. 50 0. 45
c .c.only 1. 50 1. 96

78

