UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR Harold L. Ickes, Secretary
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY W. C. Mcndenhall, Director
Bulletin 910-B
PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF THE GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT, ALASKA
BY
J. B. MERTIE, JR.
Mineral resources of Alaska, 1937 (Pages 115-145)
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON : 1939
For sale^by the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C. ....... Price 15 cents

CONTENTS

Abstract ___________._-_____-.____-____--_---_---_----_-----_-_--. Introduction. __ _______-________________--------__-___--__----____. Platinum placers.__._______-__-___--__---__----_-_____----.----_-.
History and general conditions of mining.________________________ Platinum Creek and Fox Gulch-______-__-_-________----_____._. Squirrel Creek__.___________-_-__._-___--_-_______-__----.___. Salmon River.......__-_._---.-_.._---.--.-...._..-------._... Clara Creek..__..._--....-_________..._-______.. General characteristics of the platinum group of metals._______________ Chemical analyses of Goodnews Bay platinum._______________________ Summary of conclusions regarding Goodnews Bay platinum deposits.-... Index.---______---___-________-__-____-__---_--_______-----______

Page
115' 115' 115118 120 125 127 128 132 134 142 145

ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE 2. Sketch map showing location of placer-mining claims on Salmon River and its principal tributaries____--_--_______
FIGURE 4. Sketch map of part of southwestern Alaska showing location of Platinum_-_-__-----_____----_--_--___________,_____
5. Geologic sketch map of Platinum and vicinity_____________ 6. Percentage of platinum, iridium, and osmium in total platinum
metals.__________________-___..__.._....__._...._.._.
in

Pace 126
116 117
138

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF THE GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT, ALASKA
By J. B. MERTIE, JR.
ABSTRACT
Platinum metals have been found in earlier years at several localities in Alaska, but with the exception of a palladium-copper lode in southeastern Alaska none of these deposits has been of commercial importance. The platinum deposits described in this report are placers. They were discovered in 1926 and are now being worked on a large scale.
The area containing these deposits is located in southwestern Alaska, close to Kuskokwim Bay. The bedded rocks consist of sedimentary and volcanic rocks of late Paleozoic (?) age, which have been intruded by ultrabasic and granitic rocks, and overlying all of these is a variety of unconsolidated deposits of Quaternary age. The bedded rocks have an intricate structure and are more or less recrystallized. The ultrabasic intrusive rocks consist of several varieties of peridotite and perknite, but other specialized types of igneous rocks are closely associated with them. The Quaternary deposits reveal a long and intricate geomorphic history, which is likewise a history of the deposition of the platinumbearing gravels.
INTRODUCTION
The Goodnews Bay district is an indefinite region that includes all the country contiguous to Goodnews Bay. The part of the district described in this report is a small area lying south of Goodnews Bay which, on the accompanying map, is designated Platinum and vicinity. This small area is the site of the platinum deposits that constitute the principal thesis of this report.
The map of Platinum and vicinity shows an area of about 210 square miles, between 161°28' and 161°49' west longitude and 58°48' and 59°03' north latitude. This area is bounded on the west by Kuskokwim Bay, on the north by Goodnews Bay, and on the east and south by the Kinegnak Kiver and its tributaries. The accompanying index map (fig. 4) shows the position of this area in Alaska.
PLATINUM PLACERS
In recent years interest in the district has been revived by the discovery and commercial exploitation of platinum placers in a small area just south of Goodnews Bay. Accordingly in 1937 a topographic and a geologic party were sent by the Geological Survey into the
115

116 MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937
area for the purpose of preparing maps and studying the economic geology of the platinum deposits. Gerald FitzGerald, topographic engineer, prepared a detailed topographic map of the small area called Platinum and vicinity for publication on a scale of 1:62,500 and a contour interval of 50 feet. This map has served as the base for figure 5. FitzGerald also did some less detailed topographic mapping to the east and south of the area. Geologic work was confined to the small area called Platinum and vicinity. In the
FIGURE 4. Sketch map of part of southwestern Alaska showing location of Platinum.
course of 65 days, the writer studied the areal and economic geology and prepared a detailed geologic map of this area on a scale of 1:62,500.
The detailed topographic and geologic mapping was done from field camps. In the absence of pack horses or other means of transporting equipment from camp to camp, the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. and the Clara Creek Mining Co. furnished automotive caterpillar transport; and the writer, on behalf of Mr. FitzGerald and himself, wishes to thank these two companies for their generosity and helpful cooperation in this and other ways, as a result of which the work was materially aided and expedited. Grateful acknowledgment is ^also made to the miners, prospectors, and traders of Platinum and vicmify

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTBICT

117

FIGURE 5. Geologic sketch map of Platinum and vicinity.

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937
for their hospitality, for information furnished, and for the sundry other ways in which they voluntarily helped the Survey parties.
A complete report on this investigation is in preparation, but as it ivill not be available for some tune, it was considered advisable to issue advance statements regarding certain of the significant results that so far have come out of the study. In this brief account it is impracticable to treat of the general geography or geology of the region, but these subjects will be fully covered in the more complete report.
HISTORY AND GENERAL CONDITIONS OF MINING
Placer gold has been mined in a small way for many years in the part of the Goodnews Bay district north of Goodnews Bay; but in recent years platinum placers have been discovered and mined in the area south of Goodnews Bay. These deposits are particularly important, not only because they are the first placers found in Alaska which are workable primarily for their content of platinum metals but also because the present production is far in excess of any other area so far developed in the United States or its possessions. A small amount of gold is recovered with the platinum metals. Chemical examination of the rocks from which the platinum metals are derived shows also the presence of chromium, nickel, and copper, but none of these elements appear to occur as commercial ores. Platinum metalsare therefore the only mineral products in the area called Platinum and vicinity that have any commercial value.
The general history of the discovery of platinum in this district; together with a sketch of earlier mining operations, has been given by Irving Reed.1 According to this account, platinum was discovered in 1926 at the mouth of Fox Gulch, a tributary of Platinum Creek, by an Eskimo named Walter Smith. This native, who thought the platinum was "white gold," related his discovery to another native called Henry Whuya, who in turn communicated the information to Charles Thorsen, a local resident and miner, who had lived in this district for many years. Thorsen went to the site of the discovery, panned some of the metallic material, and sent it to the office of the Bureau of Mines, at Fairbanks, where it was analyzed and determined to be platinum. In 1928 Thorsen discovered platinum in the gravels of Clara Creek, and in the same year Edward St. Clair made the first discovery of platinum on Squirrel Creek.
The complete history of the earlier mining in this district is not known, but small-scale mining plants began operations on Platinum, Squirrel, Fox, Clara, and Dowry Creeks in 1927 and 1928 and mined intermittently until the large-scale plant of the Goodnews Bay Mining
' Eeed, Irving, The Qoodnews Bay district, Alaska: Mining and mine inspection in Alaska for 1931-32, pp. 103-126, Juneau, Territory of Alaska, 1933.

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

119

Co. began work in 1934. Thus Keed 2 has recorded the fact that Charles Thorsen worked on Discovery claim of Platinum Creek in 1927, that George Weickert operated on the same claim in 1929 and 1930, and that Charles Tonietzko and John Bennett worked bench ground on claim 2 below Discovery in 1930 and 1931 (pi. 2). On Squirrel Creek placer mining was done on claim 3 below Discovery in 1931 by W. B. Moeck and Fred Wolter, and in the same year on claims 1 and 2 below Discovery, respectively by Tupper Thompson and Edward St. Clair. As early as 1927 some small-scale mining was done by natives on Fox Gulch on claim 2 above Discovery; and on Discovery claim, of Fox Gulch, Neal Corrigal worked an open cut from 1929 to 1935. Some mining was also done on Dry Gulch in 1930 by Joe Chanie and Edward St. Clair.
On Clara Creek placer mining began in 1928, and in the period from 1928 until 1931 or later Charles Thorsen and Andrew Olson mined on Discovery claim. Mining operations were also in progress until 1931 or later on claims 1, 2, and 3 above Discovery. The work on claim 1 above Discovery was done by Martin Garthe; that on claim 2 above Discovery by 0. J. Sampson and Martin Garthe; and that on claim 3 above Discovery by John Haroldsen and August Wicklund.
Most of this earlier mining was done in the valleys of Squirrel, Fox, and Clara Creeks, where the overburden was not too deep to be removed profitably by small-scale methods. Farther north in Alaska, where the ground is perpetually frozen to considerable depths, smallscale drift-mining methods could have been used. But in this part of Alaska there is no permanently frozen ground and no timber for timbering, and therefore underground mining is not practicable. Moreover, all the earlier mining was done in small valleys, where the supply of water is scarce, and hence most of the work had to be accomplished by hand methods, consisting of ground sluicing and shoveling into sluice boxes. To the several small operators it finally became evident that, although this was a promising field, mining would have to be done on a larger scale in order to be profitable. Consequently consolidation of the many mining claims began, and eventually many of the claims passed into the control of the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. and the Clara Creek Mining Co., which are now carrying on practically all the productive placer mining operations in this area.
The Goodnews Bay Mining Co., the larger of the two companies, holds or leases more than 150 claims in the valley of the Salmon River -and its tributaries. This company began mining with a dragline excavator on Squirrel Creek on August 11, 1934, and in the 3 years of 1934-36, inclusive, mined the best of the placers in that stream.
' ' Heed, Irving, op. cit., pp. 117-122. 134842 39 2

120

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

Mining by the same method was then begun on Platinum Creek in 1937, on claim 2 below Discovery, and the work was carried upstream to Fox Gulch, and for some distance up Fox Gulch during that year. This does not mean, however, that all of the pay streak on Platinum Creek within this stretch has been mined, as one or more parallel cuts will doubtless be worked later. In the summer of 1937 the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. also began the construction of a dredge, completed it that fall, and began operations on November 10, working until December 20. The length of the season in which mining can be carried on in this region with a dragline excavator is about 5% months, but the working season of the dredge is expected to be about 8 months. Including the dredge crew, about 50 persons are employed by the Goodnews Bay Mining Co.
The Clara Creek Mining Co. holds or leases about 20 claims, located mainly in the valley of the Salmon River, north of the mouth of Platinum Creek, and in the valley of Clara Creek. This company began work in 1936 'on the east end of claim 1 above Discovery on Clara Creek, and in the years 1936 and 1937 has worked up that stream to the west end of claim 3 above Discovery. About 23 persons are employed in this work. As on Platinum Creek, this doea not mean that all of the pay streak on Clara Creek within this stretch has been worked, as one or more parallel cuts will also be mined here.
It is estimated that about 3,000 ounces of platinum metals was recovered from the placers of this area between 1927 and 1934. From 1934, when large-scale mining began, to the end of 1937 the production is believed, to have been about 18,000 ounces. This includes the production of the new dredge, during its 6 weeks of operation, in 1937. It is believed that during the next few years, with the equipment now installed, if the tenor of the deposits remains as at present, the annual production for the area will not fall below 20,000 ounces.
PLATINUM CREEK AND FOX GULCH
Platinum Creek is a western tributary of the Salmon River, with an airline length of about 2 miles, though its length by the course of the stream is somewhat greater. Platinum Creek heads in a low divide only half a mile from Kuskokwim Bay, though it is 650 feet above sea level. On its south side and a little more than half a mile from its source a small valley known as Willow Gulch, enters the valley of Platinum Creek. This gulch is unimportant from both the geographic and the economic point of view and merits no further mention. No other tributaries enter Platinum Creek from the south. On its north side Platinum Creek has three tributaries,
which named in order downstream are Fox Gulch, Dry Gulch, and Squirrel Creek. All three of these head in the ultrabasic intrusive

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

121

mass to the north, and all three have deposits of platinum in their valleys. Fox Gulch, the most westerly of these tributaries, has a length of nearly a mile, but the downstream or southeastern end of its valley is inconspicuous, being merely a narrow incision in the north wall of Platinum Creek. Dry Gulch is shorter and even less conspicuous. Squirrel Creek, however, has a length of about \% miles and occupies a well-defined valley. The total area drained by Platinum Creek and its tributaries is only about 5 square miles.
The ultimate longitudinal and lateral limits of the platinum pay streaks on the various streams of this area cannot be definitely predicted, because the extent to which the platinum-bearing gravels may be worked in the future depends upon conditions that cannot at present be determined. One of these conditions is the future price of platinum metals; another is the relative proportion of the different platinum metals, which varies from place to place; other variable economic conditions constitute a third and very important factor; and finally, in the last stages of mining, when the original cost of mining equipment has been amortized, it might be desirable to work ground upon a salvage basis that would not be considered workable in the earlier stages of mining. At the present time, however, the pay streak on Platinum Creek is considered to begin at the west end of Discovery claim, at the mouth of Fox Gulch, and to continue to the east part of claim 2 below Discovery, a short distance upstream from the mouth of Squirrel Creek. From this point to the mouth of Squirrel Creek there is a short stretch, perhaps 1,000 feet in length, in which the gravels are not now considered workable. From the mouth of Squirrel Creek, the pay streak continues down Platinum Creek without interruption to its mouth. Above the mouth of Fox Gulch the gravels of Platinum Creek are not considered of workable grade, so that the pay streak of Fox Gulch may be said to constitute the headwater part of the pay streak of Platinum Creek. In view of the fact that 'the headwater branch of Platinum Creek does not drain an area occupied by ultrabasic intrusive rocks, this lack of workable placers is significant.
The width of the workable pay streak on Platinum Greet is even more difficult to state. Above the mouth of Squirrel Creek, the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. so far has worked the platinum gravels for a width of 100 to 120 feet. At the mouths of Dry and Fox Gulches the pay streak widens appreciably. It is probable, however, that this part of the pay streak will ultimately be worked for a width of at least 200 feet. Downstream from the mouth of Squirrel Creek, the pay streak on Platinum Creek widens rapidly, and near the mouth of Platinum Creek, where the dredge operated in 1937, the pay streak is at least 400 feet wide. It must be stressed, however, that this figure is based on the presumption that the ground is to be mined by dredging.

122

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

The tenor of the platinum-bearing grounds in the valley of Platinum Creek is not sufficiently well known to the writer to warrant any general statement. It is known that the pay streak between the mouths of Fox Gulch and Squirrel Creek has shown a somewhat lower tenor than the pay streak of Squirrel Creek. One clean-up on Platinum Creek,. a short distance downstream from the mouth of Fox Gulch, yielded about 0.02 ounce of platinum metals to the cubic yard, or about 0.009 ounce to the square foot of bedrock; and for some distance downstream from the site of this clean-up the pay streak is likely to have had a lower rather than a higher tenor than this. The tenor of the pay streak of Platinum Creek for some distance down-
stream from the mouth of Squirrel Creek may be higher than those indicated above.
The alluvium of Platinum Creek hi the stretch between the mouths of Fox Gulch and Squirrel Creek consists of about 12 feet of subrounded to subangular gravels overlain by about 3 feet of moss and turf, which locally is mixed with more or less dark-colored sand and hillside detritus. Drilling on Fox Gulch has shown that the gravels decrease in thickness upstream. Just downstream from the mouth of Fox Gulch and also in the southeastern end of the valley of Fox Gulch the gravel is rather coarse and subangular, cobbles averaging perhaps 8 to 12 inches in diameter, and" with some boulders as large as 3 feet in diameter. But farther downstream, the cobbles are more rounded and average from 5 to 6 niches, though large boulders are also present. Both on Platinum Creek and in Fox Gulch the gravel consists of the same kinds of rocks as the bedrock formed in the valleys of these streams. The platinum metals occur mainly on the surface and in the crevices of the bedrock, but the lower 2 to 3 feet of the gravel also contains significant amounts of these metals. In mining with a dragline excavator, the upper half to two-thirds of the alluvium is considered to contain too little of the precious metals to warrant washing. Hence this part of the overburden is lifted by the excavator and dumped to one side of the cut.
The bedrock of Platinum Creek consists of a mixture of sedimentary and igneous rocks. Among the sediments, graywacke and sheared argillite have been identified. The igneous rocks include lavas or dikes, as well as tuffs, mainly andesitic. All of the bedrock below the gravel is greatly altered, and accurate determinations of its original character cannot be made. Where the bedrock is hard and much fractured, from 3 to 4 feet of it has to be removed in order to obtain a high percentage of recovery of the platinum metals. The bedrock in the lower valley of Fox Gulch is essentially similar to that of Platinum Creek, but it is believed that the contact of the ultrabasic
intrusive mass will be uncovered when mining progresses upstream for

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

123

about a thousand feet from the mouth of the gulch. It is unlikely that the pay streak will continue very far upstream from this contact.
Most of the platinum metals on Platinum Creek occur in fine grains, and nuggets of any considerable size are uncommon, the largest so far found weighing only a quarter of an ounce. Some of
the larger pieces of platinum are intergrown with chromite, but one small piece of platinum that was shown to the writer was intergrown with country rock of the type found on Platinum Creek. The commercial analyses of the product so far mined on Platinum Creek show an average platinum content of about 60 percent, and an average iridium content of about 22 percent. Osmium forms nearly 4 percent, and rhodium nearly 2 percent of the product, but ruthenium and palladium occur only in very small amounts. The commercial
analyses also show that a small amount of free gold, amounting on. the average to about one-fourth of 1 percent, is recovered with the platinum metals. Apparently the proportion of free gold decreases in going up Platinum Creek and is practically absent in the placers at the mouth of Fox Gulch.
A large volume of concentrates is recovered with the platinum metals, and just downstream from the mouth of Fox Gulch the black sand amounted to 2 tons in a clean-up that yielded 250 ounces of platinum metals. These concentrates consist mainly of magnetite, ilmenite, and chromite. An analysis of carefully washed pebbles of chromite from these concentrates was made by E. T. Erickson, of the Geological Survey. This analysis shows that the chromite contains 0.05 ounce of platinum metals to the ton. The platinum metals in these pebbles would not be recovered on an ordinary concentrating table unless the concentrates were previously finely ground.
Upstream from Squirrel Creek, the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. has worked the placers of Platinum Creek by means of a dragline excavator. This is a type 37-B Bucyrus-Erie unit, consisting of a 75horsepower, 6-cylinder Caterpillar Diesel engine, and a 60-foot boom, mounted on a tractor base. The boom swings a digging bucket with a rated capacity of 1% cubic yards. The washing plant is a rigid unit, consisting of an elevated dump box and an elevated line of eight sluice boxes, mounted on skids, so that the plant may be moved quickly from one position to another. As soon as one cut is completed, the excavator unit drags the washing plant to a new position, and in a very short time a new cut is begun. The dump box is 8 by 12 feet in size, and is covered with a sloping grizzly to exclude large boulders. The sluice boxes are made of steel, and the sluice line is 30 inches wide and 100 feet long, set to a grade of 1 inch in 12 feet. In the dump box iron rails are used as riffles, but in the upper six and one-half lengths of the sluice boxes, horizontally slotted block riffles, made of manganese steel, are utilized. These are 2 inches

124 '

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

high, with %-inch slots in them. In the lower one and one-half lengths of the sluice boxes undercurrents are used, underlain by matting. The holes in the undercurrents are tapered, with the small diameter, about % inch, on the upper side. In order to distribute the tailings more evenly at the end of the sluice line, the last sluice box is equipped with a three-way outlet gate, so that the tailings may be discharged in three different directions. Near the lower end of the last sluice box there is a transverse slot, about 3 inches in width, in the matting and through the bottom of the sluice box, through which fines escape below to a matting-covered table, 5 feet in width and 10 feet in length. This table, having twice the width of the sluice boxes, slows up the sluice water and causes the finest of the
platinum grains to settle. As the dump box and sluice boxes are elevated, water has to be
pumped to the dump box both for washing the gravel and for sluice water. For this purpose a small dam is built in the bed of the creek a short distance downstream from the washing plant, in the cut where mining has already been completed. At this site is also mounted a 6-cylinder, 75-horsepower Caterpillar Diesel engine which operates a direct-connected Allis-Chalmers centrifugal pump, with a 12-inch intake and a 10-inch outlet. This pumping plant supplies 3,500 gallons a minute under an 80-foot head, but on account of loss of pressure in the pipe line this is reduced to a 40-foot head at the dump box. To compensate for a part of this loss of pressure, a small 20-horseppwer Diesel engine and pump are mounted directly under the sluice line and are utilized as a booster unit. A giant, with a 3-inch nozzle, is used in washing the gravel in the dump box.
In the process of cleaning up, a large part of the platinum metals is found in the dump box, but the exact ratio between the recovery in the dump box and in the sluice boxes is not known. About 13 percent of the platinum metals is recovered in the undercurrents, and about 1 percent in the concentrating table below the sluice boxes. After the rough clean-up, the platinum product is subjected to additional treatment, in order to reduce the black sand to a volume of less than 20 percent, as above that amount a penalty is charged by the purchaser. The concentrates, consisting of both pebbles and grains of black sand, is twice classified, first through a %-inch sieve and later through a twelve-mesh screen. The fines are run over a small Wilfley table two or three times, in the course of which treatment most of the black sand is eliminated. After treatment on the Wilfley table, the platinum product then recovered is further processed by an ingenious vibrating blower, which separates the material into five fractions, of which one
is almost pure platinum metals. The second is easily cleaned by
blowing with the breath; and the others are returned to the Wilfley table for further treatment. There is a certain residual product that

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTBICT

125

cannot be satisfactorily cleaned with present facilities. The finest of this material contains about 2 ounces, the coarsest about 4 ounces, of platinum metals to the ton of black sand. This material is being saved for future treatment with a ball mill and classifier. Of the total clean-up about 15 to 20 percent is recovered from the black sand that goes over the Wilfley table.
In addition to the mining equipment above mentioned, the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. also has a second dragline excavator of the erector type, which is convertible into a derrick hoist. This was used in some measure during the season of 1937, in conjunction with the other unit mainly for the purpose of removing that part of the overburden that is not put into the dump box and through the sluices. It was also used for a variety of other purposes, but chiefly as a derrick hoist, in the construction of the dredge. This unit is a type 34-B Bucyrus-Erie excavator, equipped with a 100-horsepower Caterpillar Diesel engine and having a 55-foot boom, which swings a bucket with a capacity of 1% cubic yards. The company also owns and operates a considerable variety of electrical equipment, of which the more important are a 6 %-kilowatt Fairbanks-Morse direct-current generator, a 1%kilowatt direct-current Kohler plant, a %- and 1%-kilowatt converter for changing direct current to alternating current, direct-current Kohler plants on the two dragline units, a small windmill generator for radio receiving and for lighting in winter, and a variety of electrical machines in the radio station, which the company owns and operates. There are also a high voltage, 3-phase alternating-current generator and a direct-current Kohler plant on the dredge.

SQUIRREL CREEK
Squirrel Creek is the most easterly and largest tributary of Platinum Creek, entering from the north. Squirrel Creek has a length of about \% miles and occupies a well-defined valley, which in its lower reaches is broad and open. The headwater part of the valley is a narrow gulch, cutting well back into the central portion of the ultrabasic intrusive massif that forms Red Mountain.
The placers of Squirrel Creek were worked by the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. by means of a dragline excavator during the seasons of 1934, 1935, and 1936 and are now nearly exhausted. The ground that was worked extended from the south end of Discovery claim downstream for 2,600 feet nearly to the south end of claim 3 below Discovery. In this stretch, the width of the pay streak ranged from 150 to 550 feet, being narrowest in the medial part of claim 3 below Discovery and widest in the vicinity of Tupper Gulch, a small tributary from the west. This ground was worked in from one to four parallel cuts, but in the vicinity of Tupper Gulch, the fourth or most westerly cut was of almost too low grade to be profitable. Some of

126

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

the placers of Squirrel Creek were of rather high grade, approaching 0.1 ounce to the cubic yard, but the average tenor for the whole pay streak is reported to have been about 0.03 ounce to the cubic yard.
The gravel of the southern end of the pay streak of Squirrel Creek is similar in size and" shape to that of Platinum Creek, upstream from the mouth of Squirrel Creek, but at the upper or northern end of the pay streak it was coarse and angular and more nearly similar to that of Eox Gulch. As on Platinum Creek, the petrographic character of the gravel is the same as that of the rocks within the drainage basin. The average thickness of the alluvium in Squirrel Creek is
about 13 feet, but in the most westerly cut, in the vicinity of Tupper Gulch, the thickness increases to about 20 feet. The bedrock of most of the valley of Squirrel Creek is essentially the same as that on Platinum Creek, but in the northern part of the pay streak, near the line between Discovery claim and claim 1 below Discovery, the contact between the country rock and the ultrabasic intrusive mass of Red Mountain was uncovered; and from this point upstream the ultrabasic rocks form the bedrock. On account of tailings and sediment in the cut this contact is not now actually visible, but its position is closely marked by the bedrock material that was excavated during the mining operations and is now dumped on one side of the cut. From the character of this material it is evident that the contact at this place was the site of a peripheral intrusion of gabbro-pegmatitic material, the crystallization of which probably postdated that of the ultrabasic rocks of Red Mountain. Some of the coarser samples of this material are greenish-black and consist almost entirely of large crystals of hornblende. Other samples of the coarser material consist mainly of albite, intergrown with considerable white sericite.
The platinum metals recovered from Squirrel Creek occurred generally in coarser grains than these same metals found on Platinum Creek, and nuggets were somewhat more common. The largest nugget found on Squirrel Creek weighed 1% ounces. A comparison of the commercial analyses of the platinum metals found on these two creeks shows that the product of Squirrel Creek contains on the average 8% percent more of platinum and 9 percent less of iridium than that of Platinum Creek. It is an interesting fact, however, that the sum of the platinum and iridium, as shown by all the commercial analyses from this district, tends to approach a constant value, approximating 82 percent of the product as given by the commercial analyses. The proportions of the other metals of the platinum group, and also of gold as found on Squirrel Creek, are not significantly different from those found on Platinum Creek.

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

BULLETIN 91Q' PLATE 2

1 MILE
SKETCH MAP SHOWING LOCATION OF PLACER-MINING CLAIMS ON SALMON RIVER AND ITS PRINCIPAL TRIBUTARIES.

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY.DISTRICT

127

SALMON RIVER
Little mining had been done by the fall of 1937 in the valley of 1 he Salmon River, but the general extent of the platinum placers had been determined by the drilling operations of the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. From the mouth of Medicine Creek the pay streak extends downstream on the Salmon River for at least 2K miles, with a width ranging from 300 to 1,000 feet. Upstream from the mouth of Medicine Creek insufficient drilling has yet been done to delimit the workable ground, but it appears reasonable to expect a downstream continuation of .the pay streak of Clara Creek. The configuration of the valley of the Salmon River upstream from the mouth of Medicine Creek is such as to suggest that such a pay streak may lie along the east side of the valley.
The upstream limit of the V-shaped incision in the bedrock floor of the Salmon River and its tributaries has not been traced on the Salmon River, but judging from the fact that the incision extends 2 miles up the valley of Medicine Creek and half a mile up the valley of Platinum Creek, it might be expected to persist up the valley of the Salmon River at least as far as Clara Creek. So far as known now this incision lies for the most part west of the present bed of the stream. The platinum metals in the pay streak of the Salmon River are found both on the bedrock of this deep incision and on the higher bedrock on its sides. It is also significant that the platinum placers are neither appreciably richer nor leaner in this notch than on the higher bedrock. Drilling has also shown that the.thickness of the alluvium in the Salmon River at the site of the pay streak is 25 to 50 feet.
Some further local details regarding the pay streak on the Salmon River are known from the operations of a dredge, which was installed by the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. in 1937 near the mouth of Platinum Creek. This dredge was built in the valley of the Salmon River, on claim 1 below Discovery, west of the river and about 50 yards southwest of the mouth of Platinum Creek. In the fall of 1937 the dredge worked northwestward and about parallel to Platinum Creek for a distance of 750 feet, taking a cut 200 to 250 feet wide. The average depth of the gravel within this stretch is about 35 feet.
The proportions of the precious metals recovered by the dredge are significantly different from those found either on Platinum or Squirrel Creeks. The proportion of platinum, for example, is about 13K percent higher than that of Platinum Creek and 5 percent higher than that of Squirrel Creek. Conversely, the proportion of iridium is 13 percent lower than that of Platinum Creek and 4 percent lower than ' that of Squirrel Creek. Another significant fact is that the proportion of gold recovered with the platinum metals by the dredge is considerably greater than that recovered on Squirrel and Platinum Creeks.
134842 39 3

128

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

The dredge had not been built at the time of the writer's visit to Goodnews Bay, but its construction was afterwards described by Sawin,3 from whose paper a part of the following data were taken. The dredge is of the Yuba type, built by the Yuba Manufacturing Co., of San Francisco. The hull is assembled from 33 steel pontoons, electrically welded together, and measures 130 feet long, 60 feet wide, and 9% feet deep. The total weight of the hull, machinery, and superstructure is about 1,400 tons. With the digging ladder set at an angle of 45° the dredge can dig 50 feet below water level, and with the ladder held at 25° the hull has about 3 feet of freeboard. The digging ladder is 112 feet long and is equipped with buckets having a capacity of 8 cubic feet. The dredge operates from two spuds, two bow lines, and two stern lines and has two winches on the starboard side, one of which has 8 drums. The other is an independent ladder hoist winch. The stacker is 140 feet long and like the digging ladder is covered and heated to permit operation in subzero weather. The 36-inch stacker belt is made of canvas and rubber. The trommelscreen is 7% feet in diameter and has a perforated section 26 feet long. The power plant, which is on the boat, is a Mclntosh-Seymour Westinghouse diesel-electric generator, rated at 625 kilovolt-amperes. It delivers high voltage three-phase current, for electric operation throughout.
The dredge began mining operations on November 10, 1937, and worked for 41 days before closing down for the season. In 1938 it began work on April 27, so that it would appear that the working season in this district will be about 8 months. It was planned that the dredge should work up the valley of Platinum Creek only to claim 5 below Discovery, where it would turn and come back down the valley of Platinum Creek, into the valley of the Salmon River, where its principal work will be done. The Goodnews Bay Mining Co. plans to work claim 4 and part of claim 5 below Discovery, on Platinum Creek, by means of a dragline excavator.

CLARA CREEK

Clara Creek is a western tributary of the Salmon River, entering the Salmon about 2% miles by airline upstream from the mouth of Platinum Creek. Clara Creek heads in the north end of the ultrabasic massif that forms Red Mountain and flows about S. 50° E. from its source to its mouth, a distance of about 1% miles. The valley of Clara Creek is not well marked, even in its headwaters, and in reality is little :tnore than a straight shallow gulch without tributaries, which is incised In the west wall of the valley of the Salmon River. The total area
drained by Clara Creek is estimated to be less than \% square miles.

« Sawin, H. A., Bucket dredge installed at Goodnews Bay, Alaska: Eng. and Min. Jour., vol. 139, no. 5,

pp. 40-41,1938.

" -' -' '

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF 'GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

129

The longitudinal and lateral limits of the platinum pay streak on Clara Creek are not well known, as little drilling has yet been done in this valley, and large-scale mining operations have been carried on only since 1936, from the eastern end of claim 1 above Discovery upstream. According to Reed 4 earlier mining on a small scale was done on Discovery claim, and on claims 1, 2, and 3 above Discovery, but this work was confined to a narrow channel in the bed of the creek and did not serve to test the width of the pay streak. It is probable that the pay streak is continuous from the contact of the ultrabasic rocks in the headwaters of Clara Creek downstream to its mouth, with the possible exception of that part of the valley contiguous to the Salmon River, where the platinum-bearing placers may have been disturbed by changes in the course of the Salmon River that occurred at the end of the glacial period. The tenor of the platinum placers of Clara Creek cannot at present be definitely stated. Reports of the earlier small-scale mining indicate that some of the placers contained as much as 0.08 ounce of platinum metals to the cubic yard of gravel, but as in the valley of Squirrel Creek, the amount of such ground was small. It is likely that the large-scale operations now in progress will disclose an average tenor, including the platinum mined in earlier years, of about 0.02 ounce to the cubic yard of gravel.
In the placer-mining operations of the Clara Creek Mining Co., a cut ranging from 100 to 150 feet in width has been mined from the eastern end of claim 1 above Discovery upstream to the western end of claim 3 above Discovery, where mining terminated at the end of the season of 1937. Throughout most of this distance the operators have mined what they consider the south side of the pay streak, with the idea that there is at least as much additional ground to the north that can ultimately be worked. At the west end of their operations, however, on claim 3 above Discovery, the dragline plant crossed to the north side of the pay streak, leaving a block of ground on the south side to be worked later.
The alluvial material on Clara Creek has a thickness of 10 to 12 feet, of which the upper 2 to 3 feet consists of turf, peat, and darkcolored vegetal material mixed with sand. Throughout most of the valley of Clara Creek the gravel though subangular is of small size, the cobbles averaging perhaps not more than 3 or 4 inches in diameter. Unlike the conditions found in the valley of Platinum Creek and its tributaries, the gravel of Clara Creek, though consisting in part of materials derived from the local bedrock, includes also a considerable quantity of rocks of foreign origin, which undoubtedly is glaciofluviatile gravel derived from a glacier that formerly reached the
< Reed, Irving, The Qoodnews Bay district, Alaska: Mining and mine inspection in Alaska for 1931-1932, pp. 113-116, Juneau, Territory of Alaska, 1933.

130

MINERAL, RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

divide at the head of the Salmon River. At the west end of claim 3 above Discovery, the mining operations of 1937 began to uncover large boulders, mainly of chert, as much as 3 or 4 feet in diameter, which lay near the upper surface of the alluvial cover. An examination of the north end of the ridge forming Red Mountain discloses the fact that erratic gravel, of glacial origin, is there present, up to an altitude of 600 feet above the present level of the Smalls River. The spur north of Clara Creek is likewise covered by gravel of glacial origin. These facts explain the heterogeneity of the gravel on Clara Creek. They explain, moreover, the presence of large boulders in the upper horizons of the alluvium at the head of Clara Creek, as these may thus be interpreted as glacial erratics, which subsequently became mixed with other hillside detritus.
The bedrock that has been exposed by mining operations in Clara Creek consists of greatly sheared and greatly decomposed rocks of several types, the exact origin and character of which is not determinable. Apparently they include chiefly sheared chert, quartzite of cherty origin, quartzite of graywacke origin, tull'aceous rocks, and chlorite schist, the latter being related closely to the sheared chert. The cleavage and schistosity of these rocks is purely a local phenomenon induced perhaps by stresses attendant upon the intrusion of the ultrabasic rocks to the west. Mining operations in the valley of Clara Creek have shown that the bedrock floor, beneath the gravels, has an unsymmetrical transverse profile, rising steeply on the south side and gradually on the north side.
The platinum metals on Clara Creek are found mainly on the surface and in the crevices of bedrock, of which at some places 3 to 4 feet has to be removed in order to obtain a high recovery. The platinum metals also occur in the lower horizons of the overlying gravel, but unlike the conditions on Platinum Creek, enough platinum also occurs in the upper horizons that it is unsafe to strip very far below the surface. Actually, in addition to the surficial turf and vegetal material, only about 2 or 3 feet of the gravel deposit is stripped and dumped to one side, and all the remainder is put through the sluice boxes.
The platinum metals recovered on Clara Creek are rather fine grained, but nuggets are not uncommon, and one nugget weighing about 2 ounces has been recovered. The platinum product differs markedly from that found on Platinum and Squirrel Creeks in that the ratio of platinum is definitely higher and of iridium much lower; but the ratio of platinum is rather similar to that mined by the dredge
at the mouth of Platinum Creek. The proportion of osmium found on Clara Creek is much lower than that found on any other creek in
this district. The amount of gold recovered on Clara Creek, however, is several times that recovered on Squirrel and Platinum Creeks.

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

131

It was also noticed that the impurities in the commercial analyses are considerably greater for the Clara Creek product than for the product mined by the Goodnews Bay Mining Co. If both products were recomputed free of black sand, however, the discrepancies in the respective contents of platinum would be even more marked than the above comparison indicates, whereas the other ratios would not be greatly altered.
The placer-mining methods used by the Clara Creek Mining Co. .are similar to those on Platinum Creek previously described. The moss and turf is first stripped off, either with the dragline bucket or by ground sluicing. For digging the gravels a Northwest dragline excavator, mounted on a tractor base, is used. This has a 55-foot boom and a bucket with a rated capacity of 1% cubic yards. The excavator is equipped with a 6-cylinder Caterpillar Diesel engine of 130 horsepower. The washing plant is a rigid unit mounted on skids. It consists of a dump box 12 feet square and a sluice line 102 feet long made up of steel sluice boxes each 8 feet long .and 30 inches wide into which the dump box discharges: A giant with a 3-inch nozzle is used to clean the gravel in the dump box. The first 64 feet of the sluice line has riffles composed of manganese steel gratings, followed by 3 feet of undercurrents, which discharge through the bottom of a sluice box onto a small table, mounted below the sluice line. Next follows 16 feet of grating riffles, succeeded by 3 feet of undercurrents, which .also discharge through the bottom of a sluice box to another submounted concentrating table. The last 16 feet of the sluice line consists of more undercurrents. Matting is used both under the undercurrents and on the two tables mounted below the sluice line.
Water for the sluicing operations is obtained by impounding the water of Clara Creek downstream from the mining operations, in the cut that has already been worked. At this plant two dams are used, so that most of the mud settles above the upper dam and less muddy water is yielded at the lower dam. For pumping, a 115-horsepower 6-cylinder Caterpillar Diesel engine is used on a centrifugal pump with a 12-inch intake and a 10-inch outlet. This delivers 4,200 gallons of water a minute, under an 80-foot head. This is supplemented by a 30-horsepower Fairbanks-Morse Diesel engine and small pump used under the dump box to compensate for loss of pressure in the pipe line.
The amount of concentrates recovered here with the platinum metals is as great as on Platinum Creek, and at the time of the writer's visit in August 1937 a small Wilfley table and a small Joshua Hendy ball mill were being installed to clean these concentrates. A mill is a desirable accessory to the table, in that the concentrates can thus be ground to a more uniform size, which greatly increases the efficiency of separation. This grinding will also free the platinum metals that are intergrown with grains of chromite.

132

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

Before discussing certain of the results obtained through the chemical analysis of the product of the Goodnews Bay placers, it may be of service to those not familiar with the properties of the platinum group of metals to state briefly some of their more significant characteristics.
The physical and chemical properties of the various platinum metals have been studied by many investigators, but much remains to be done, particularly in the study of natural platinum alloys. It is a well known fact that certain metals, when they occur as atomic
mixtures, give rise to alloys that do not necessarily have the physical or chemical properties of their components. Individual grains of placer platinum undoubtedly contain not only these submicroscopic atomic mixtures but also particles of the individual metallic components, which are large enough to be resolved under the microscope. The placer grains of platinum metals differ also in composition, and doubtless some could be found which are higher in platinum, osmium, iridium, or palladium than others. But it is improbable that any one grain could be selected which on chemical analysis would prove to be entirely free of any one of the six platinum metals. Therefore the placer platinum may be regarded as atomic and mechanical mixtures, representative of stable phases that existed successively during the period of their formation. In this paper the term alloy is used to mean all such metallic mixtures., whether atomic or mechanical.
These conditions show that it is practically impossible to determine the character of any individual grain or nugget of platiniferous composition by any simple chemical or physical tests. Field tests that may serve to distinguish the pure metals are meaningless when applied to alloys. The magnetic property shown by some platinum metals may or may not be due to the presence of alloyed iron, and in any event the intensity of the magnetic susceptibility is no indication of the quantitative content of iron. Some stainless nickel steels, for example, are nearly as magnetic as soft iron, but others are essentially nonmagnetic. In a similar way, the specific gravity of a sample of platinum metals cannot be theoretically computed from the specific gravities of the various components together with a chemical analysis because of molecular readjustments between the components. Practically, therefore, it is futile to give chemical and physical tests for the determination of platinum alloys. Again the chemical and physical properties of the pure metals are of much interest, but the chemistry of platinum metals is too vast a field to be summarized in a geologic report.
Some of the more well-known physical properties, however, are
shown in the following table for those interested in platinum mining.

Physical properties of the precious metals Paramagnetic

Atomic weight

Specific gravity

Melting point (°C.)

Boiling point (°C.)

Hardness (Mob's scale)

Electrical resistivity (ohms per
cm2.03°,) at

Magnetic susceptibility (mass unit, 18°)

Thermal coefficient of linear expansion
(20°)

Crystailographic system

195.2 193. 1 190.8 101.7 102.9 106.7

21.45 22.4 22.5 12.2 12.5 11.9

1,755 2,350 2,700 2,450 1,955

4,300 4,800 5. 300 2.800 2,500 2,200

4.5 10.5X10-6 1. 10X10-« 8.9X10-« 6.5 6. OX10-« . 14X10-6 7.0 9.0X10-6 .05X10-« 6.1X10-6 6.5 10. OXlC-« .50X10-6 9.1X10-6 4.0 5. IX 10-" 1.11X10-8 S.4X10-« 4.8 10.8X10-6 5.4X10-6 11.8X10-6

Brittle. Brittle.

Diamagnetic

Gold............. 197.2 Silver. __ . __ . 107.9

19.3 10.5

1,063 960

2,600

2.5 2. 4X10-6 -0.15X10-6 14.2X10-6 Cubic_ __ .... 3.0 1.6X10-6 -.20X10-6

Workability

O O t) *
VI H fit)i Q
CO CO

134

MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

This table shows numerous significant relations. Lode or placer gold never occurs pure in nature but is always alloyed with more or less silver; and although the usual composition of such alloys is75 to 80 percent of gold, 24 to 19 percent of silver, and about 1 percent of dross, yet many variations are known. These relatively simple alloys are composed essentially of two elements, of which one is much heavier than the other. Actually the specific gravities of gold and silver have the ratio of 1.84:1, and their atomic weight the ratio of 1.83:1.
Analogously, the platinum metals consist of alloys of six metals, of which three are heavy metals and three are lighter. If the average specific gravity of platinum, indium, and osmium is compared with the average specific gravity of ruthenium, rhodium, and palladium, it will be found that the ratio of these two means is 1.81:1; and a similar mean summation of the atomic weights is found to result in the ratio 1.86:1. There seems, therefore, to be a physical analogy between gold and platinum alloys; but on the other hand it should be noted that although the atomic weight of gold is greater than the mean atomic weights of platinum, iridium, and osmium, the specific gravity of the three heaviest of the platinum metals is greater than the specific gravity of gold. The same generalizations hold true for silver as compared with ruthenium, rhodium, and palladium as a group.
The melting points of the platinum metals do not correlate with this subdivision of heavier and lighter elements, as platinum, one of the heavier group of platinum metals, has a much lower melting point than two of the lighter group. But there does seem to be a correlation between these two groups and the boiling points, as all the elements of the heavier group have higher boiling points. The other physical properties above tabulated appear to bear no unique relation^ ship to the specific gravities of the platinum metals. Gold is the softest and osmium is the hardest of the precious metals. Silver has the highest electrical conductivity and palladium the least. All the platinum metals are paramagnetic, but gold and silver are diamagnetic; and of the platinum metals palladium has the highest and osmium the lowest magnetic susceptibility. Osmium and ruthenium are crystallographically hexagonal, but all the other precious metals belong in the cubic system. And finally, gold has the greatest degree of ductility and malleability, but among the platinum metals, platinum stands first and osmium or iridium last in this respect, the last
two being actually brittle.
CHEMICAL ANALYSES OF GOODNEWS BAY PLATINUM
The platmum metals recovered in the placer-mining operations in
this area are platinum, iridium, osmium, ruthenium, rhodium, and palladium. A small amount of gold is also recovered. Careful analysis in the chemical laboratory of the Geological Survey has

135

shown that the platinum metals contain no alloyed gold and that

the gold contains little or no alloyed platinum metals. Therefore all

the gold found in the placers is free gold.

In marketing the platinum metals, the two mining companies of

the Goodnews Bay district have utilized different methods. The

Goodnews Bay Mining Co. in 1937 sent its product to Ledoux & Co.,

of New York City, where it was analyzed and held to await the selling

order of the company. In this transaction Ledoux & Co. acted only

as chemists, assuring both the seller and the purchaser of the purity

and grade of the product. But in 1938 the Goodnews Bay Mining

Co. had its product analyzed by two independent concerns D. C.

Griffith & Co. and Johnson, Matthey & Co. and contracted with

Johnson, Matthey & Co. to take its entire output. The Clara Creek

Mining Co. on the other hand sells its product to the Wildberg Bros.

Smelting & Eefining Co. of San Francisco, who are both analysts and

purchasers of the product.

As the placer product is inconstant, every shipment of platinum

metals must be analyzed in order to learn its intrinsic value. In the

sale of these precious metals, all the platinum metals and gold are paid

for in the ratios of their presence in the product. But unlike the prac-

tice in gold placer mining, the silver in the gold is regarded as an

impurity and does not enter into the composite sales price. As a

result of this practice the commercial assays show only the amount

of pure gold and no silver. The common elements of the dross iron,

copper, and nickel are likewise neglected. Hence the commercial

assays, though accurate as to the content of precious metals, do not

give the complete composition of the platinum and gold alloys but.

instead contain an item called impurities, which represents all the

elements of the dross, together with any extraneous metallic impurities,

such as lead shot, solder, and other such materials. Nevertheless such

analyses yield a great deal of information regarding the placer product,

and the writer is greatly indebted to the Goodnews Bay Mining Co.

and to the Clara Creek Mining Co. for their courtesy in making these

analyses available for publication in this report. All these analyses,

arranged by creeks and in numerical order downstream are given

below:

Commercial analyses of platinum metals

Platinum Creek

[Ledoux & Co., analysts]

1234 56 78

Gold: ...............................

56.25 25.43 5.55
.38 1.48 .21
10.70

61.71 20.52 4.34
.31 1.98 .13
11.01

61.62 19.43 4.74
.37 2.01 .24 Trace 11.59

61.38 21.21 3.76
.44
1.6(5 .22 .02 11.31

60.88
21.65
4.09 .48 1.58 .23
.02 11.07

59.73 23.04 4.42
.33 1.53 .21
.15 10.59

59.42 23.24 4.74
.37 1.52 .28 .24 10.19

57.81 23.52 3.57
.40
1.93 .JO
.37 12.30

136 MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

Commercial analyses of platinum metals Continued Platinum Creek Continued

9 10 11 12 13 14 Mean

Platinum.. ___________________ 57.97 24.21
Osmium.. ____________________ . 3.58 .49 2.28 .28
Gold..... ................................... .28 10.91

57. 75 25.83 4.34
.46 1.67 .14 .29 9.52

56.65 24.31 3.42
.30 3.13 .16 .78 11.25

57.96 23.39 3.50
.27 1.68 .26
u 12.40

65.23
1C OA
1.85 .19
1 7Q
.27 91 13.46

66.95
1R K4
9 SQ
9Q
1.38 .24
QC
H 17

60 09
99 fu
3.91 .36 1.83 .21 .28 11.26

1-14. Arranged in order from southeastern end of Fox Gulch downstream on Platinum Creek to the eastern part of claim 2 below Discovery.
Squirrel Creek [Ledoux & Co., analysts]

15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Mean

Gold. ...............................

65.92 13.77 3.75
.46 1.30 .34 .16 14.30

fia ";n 12.73 3.34
.14 1.52 .29 .15 13.33

68.35 14.44 3.09
.22 1.90 .16 .25 11.59

68.84 12.32 3.19
.14 1.45 .17 .16 13.73

68.88 15.63 3.48
.44 1.04 .48 .37 9.68

72.33 9.41 2.05 .19 1.34 .23 1.21 13.24

66.53 13.54 3.98
.27 1.25 .19 .54 13.70

68.48 13.12 3.27
.26 1.40 .26 .41 12.80

15. Discovery claim and claim 1 below Discovery. 16. Claim 1 below Discovery. 17. Claims 1 and 2 below Discovery. 18. Tupper Gulch, ad.ioining claims 1 and 2 below Discovery; and on claims 1 and 2 below Discovery. 19-20. Claim 2 below Discovery. 21. Claim 2 below Discovery and Sinclair fraction.
Salmon River [Ledoux & Co., analysts]

22 23 24 25 26 Mean

Gold.... ..-. ._.- ......__..

74.58
2.07 .14 1.89 .32 1.62 10. 08

75.03
1.77 .13 2.02 .33 1.77 9.91

79 13
8.54 2.13 .16 1.80 .27 2.72 12.25

72.94 8.64 2.16 .21 1.84 .28 2.44 11.49

72.31 9 14 2.14 .12 1.83 .29 2.54 11.63

73.40 8 QO 2.05 .15 1.88 .30 2.22 11.07

22-26. Claim 1 below Discovery, and right limit bench opposite claim 1 below Discovery, arranged in order downstream.
Clara Creek
[Wildberg Bros. Smelting & Refining Co., analysts]

27 27

71? 9Q
5.90 .69 .13

Gold....-................. ...........

0.42 .56 1.01 18.00

Certain relations are at once apparent from these sets of analyses, but they are still more apparent in the four mean recomputed analyses
below, which omit gold and impurities.

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT Recomputed analyses of platinum metals

137

Platinum Squirrel Salmon

Creek

Creek

Kiver

67.93 24.93 4.42
.41 2.07 .24
100.00

78.90 15.12 3.77
.30 1.61 .30
100. 00

84.65 10.30 2.36
.17 2.17 .35 100. 00

Clara Creek
QO dQ
7.29 .85 .52 .69 JOO.OO

From this tabulation it is apparent that both iridium and osmium decrease though at different rates as platinum increases. In the diagram, figure 6, the four mean percentages of platinum are plotted as ordinates, against abscissas arbitrarily chosen, so that the four resulting points will lie upon a straight line. If now the percentages of iridium and osmium are also plotted as ordinates, against the same respective abscissas, it will be observed that two straight lines will almost pass through the corresponding points. This indicates that some kind of an inverse relation exists between platinum on the one hand and iridium and osmium on the other hand.
This diagram also brings out a significant geographic relation. Much of the material containing platinum metals in Platinum Creek, &bove the mouth of Squirrel Creek, came out of the valley of Fox Gulch. Hence if the first, second, and fourth abscissas are considered to represent respectively Fox Gulch, Squirrel Creek, and Clara Creek, it will be seen that there is a regular change in the character of the platinum metals in going northeast from Fox Gulch along the flank of the ultrabasic intrusive mass. Even more significant is the fact that the third abscissa, which represents the Salmon River, falls in about halfway between Squirrel Creek and Clara Creek, as if the Salmon River product were about an equal mixture of platinum metals from Squirrell and Clara Creeks. As the Salmon River analyses represent the product of the Salmon River at the mouth of Platinum Creek this relation is exactly what would be theoretically expected.
Two other less significant relations are also apparent. Ruthenium decreases and palladium increases as platinum increases, but the rates of change are nonlinear. These conditions suggest that palladium is closely related to platinum and that ruthenium may be more closely related to osmium and iridium. The rate of change of rhodium is anomalous.
All the relations above mentioned, when considered together, suggest that two dominant alloys form the principal components of the platinum metals mined in this district. One of these alloys is platinum combined with considerable iridium and small quantities of the

PERCENTAGE OF PLATINUM METALS

J_

8

$

? __2___^

2. Platinum Creek

co
00

Squirrel Creek

o cj &o

PI-

Salmon River

Clara Creek Percentage of platinum, iridium, and osmium in total platinum metals.

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OP GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

139

other four elements. The other alloy is osmium and iridium combined probably with small quantities of platinum, ruthenium, and rhodium and traces of palladium. It is probable that these two dominant alloys are themselves of variable composition. All that can be inferred on this subject, therefore, is that two dominant but variable alloys probably exist in these placers, and that there are definite ranges of the composition of each of these alloys, so that they do not grade continuously into one another.
In order to learn the entire composition of the platinum metals, two analyses were made in the chemical laboratory of the Geological Survey. One of these analyses of material corresponding closely to sample 1 of the commercial analyses was made to determine only the metals of the dross. This analysis was then combined with Ledoux's analysis of sample 1, to serve essentially as a complete analysis. The second analysis was a complete one of the platinum metals from Clara Creek. These results are given below:

Chemical analysis of dross of platinum metals from Clara Creek [R. C. Wells, analyst]

Material correspond-
ing to sample 1

Recomputed free of SiOi and MgO

SiO>.. .......... ........... ................. ......................... ........ MgO_. -..--..-.-..-...-.............-. . .-_..-....-.. ..-.....

Nickel.-. . _ .

.

0.23 Trace
7.30 .39 .26

7.32 .39 .26

NOTE. No gold, silver, cobalt, or manganese was found in the sample. Specific gravity, 18.33 (determined by George Steiger).

Below are given commercial analysis No. 1 and No. 1 combined with this dross analysis.

Analyses of platinum metals from Fox Gulch

Commercial analysis No. 1

Complete analysis

Nickel............ _ ................... __ ...... __ ............ ___ ...

56.26 25.43 5.55
.38 1.48 .21
10.70 100.00

57.96 26.21 5.72
.39 1.53 .22 7.32 .39 .26
100. 00

140 MINERAL RESOURCES OF ALASKA, 1937

The complete analysis of the sample from Clara Creek and its recomputation free of MgO and A1203 are given below:

Complete analysis of the platinum metals from Clara Creek [J. K. Murata, analyst]

Part solu- Part insolble in uble in
aqua regia aqua regia

Total

Recomputed free of MgO and AhOs

MgO..... AAtOt.. ..................................................
Total.. ............................................

80. 80 2.20 1.53 '.28 1.38 .14 9.38 .37 .09 .03 .10 .35
95.65

0.59 81.39 3.11 5.31
.53 .28 .06 1.44 .14 9.38 .37 .09 .03 .10 .35 3.76 99.41

82.25 5.37 .54 .28 1.45 .14 9.48 .37 .09 .03 100. 0»

i Osuium and ruthenium of soluble and insoluble portions were combined. NOTE. No gold, silver, thallium, lead, tin, mercury, chromium, manganese, arsenic, or antimony were found. Specific gravity of sample, 17.20, determined by George Steiger.

In the analysis of the platinum metals from Clara Creek, a preliminary treatment was given by immersion in a 1:1 solution of hydrochloric acid to remove surficial material that was not a proper part of the platinum alloy. With regard to the analytical methods of this analysis, Mr. Murata appends the following note:
The scheme for the determination of the platinum metals published recently by Gilchrist and Wichers 5 was used in the chemical analysis. A preliminary separation from the base metals was effected through a method developed by Gilchrist.6' Dr. Gilchrist's courtesy in making the details of the method available prior to publication is greatly appreciated. The sample was attacked with aqua regia and the insoluble residue alternately fused with the sodium hydroxide-sodium peroxideflux and with sodium chloride in an atmosphere of chlorine.
Between a fourth and a third of the grains of platinum metals in the sample from Clara Creek are magnetic, though in varying degrees. All the grains, however, are held by a strong electromagnet. Mr. Murata found that the magnetic grains are generally darker in color than the nonmagnetic grains; they also give off an appreciable amount
of iron (about 0.4 percent) during the preliminary treatment with hydrochloric acid. Although they tend to be less magnetic after this acid treatment, no correlation was found between the total content of iron in the alloy and the magnetic property.
The platinum metals of Clara Creek were also tested spectrographically by George Steiger, of the Geological Survey, who says:
» Oilchrist, Raleigh, and Wichers, E., Procedure for the separation of the six platinum metals from one another and for their gravimetric determination: Am. Chem. Soc. Jour., vol. 55. pp. 2565-2573,1935.
» Oilchrist. Raleigh, New procedure for the analysis of dental gold alloys: Bur. Standards Research Jour., vol. 20, pp. 745-771, 1938.

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

141

Three grains of the alloy were tested separately in the spectrograph, by placing each directly in the electrode without any chemical separation. Two of the grains were "non" or very weakly magnetic, the other was easily attracted by a weak magnet. No difference between the grains was detected by the spectrograph. Each grain gave distinct tests for copper and iron, a weak test for arsenic, and a possible test for silver.
Several lead lines were noted in one of the specimens. The specimens were also tested for boron, beryllium, bismuth, cadmium, germanium, antimony, tin, and zinc. Negative results were given for all these metals. From magnetic properties already observed, the iron content evidently varies greatly. The copper content may also vary, but no indication of this was observed. These two metals can be easily and accurately quantitatively determined by simple chemical methods, using no larger quantities of material than is found in individual grains.
The two complete analyses of the platinum metals of Fox Gulch and Clara Creek represent so far as now known the two extremes in composition in the platinum alloys of this area. The alloy from Clara Creek contains about 24 percent more platinum than the one from
Fox Gulch; but the product from Fox Gulch contains about 5 times as much iridium and 10 times as much osmium as the alloy from Clara Creek. As the absolute amounts of osmium are small in both alloys,, the osmium relation has no economic'significance. But as the market price of iridium is usually 3 or 4 times that of platinum, the high content of iridium in the alloy of Fox Gulch is an important economic factor, as the price of the product is thereby considerably enhanced.
The gold found with the platinum metals also leads to some significant inferences. From the beginning of the field work it was believed that some of the gold recovered with the platinum metals, particularly on Clara Creek and on the Salmon River, was erratic gold, which was transported to the head of the valley of the Salmon River and there deposited in the glacial outwash deposits. These deposits were subsequently reworked by fluviatile action, and the gold was thus added to the preexisting placers. Some of the gold, however for example in Fox Gulch, Squirrel Creek, and Platinum Creek above the mouth of Squirrel Creek was not introduced by glacial action, as no glacial ice from the north penetrated into these valleys. The gold found in these valleys is therefore of local origin and may be connected genetically with certain dikes of sodic granite and syenite that cut the ultrabasic rocks. As the sodic granites and syenites are believed to be differentiates of the basic magma, it was thought that the dross of" this gold alloy might show a relationship with the dross of the platinum metals. Accordingly an analysis was made in the laboratory of the Geological Survey of a hand-picked sample of the gold from Spuirrel Creek. The results of this analysis are given on the following page..

142

Complete analysis of placer gold from Squirrel Creek [E. T. Erickson, analyst]

Analysis

Recomputed free of SiO i, AlaOs, CrsOa, and insoluble
material

Gold.. ........ .......................... ......................... ........... Silver.. ............................... .................................... .. Cr^Q^..... .................... ....... ........................................ SiOaand AhOs. .--.--..----- __ -- __ - __ ----- __ --- ______ . ___ .

83.90 10.42
.002 .96 .002 .43 ' 1.73 97. 451

fi7 QO
10.93 .002 1.07 .008
100. 000

1 Includes 0.00 iron and no chromium. Specific gravity of sample, 13.32, determined by George Steiger. NOTE. No lead or bismuth was found in the sample.

Ordinarily copper and iron constitute the dross of placer gold, but the relative proportions of these two metals vary greatly. In this analysis iron is the dominant mineral of the dross, and copper occurs only in a minute amount. Nickel also forms a small proportion of the dross but is nevertheless nearly 4 times as plentiful as copper.
The analyst has interpreted the chromium not as an alloyed metal but as Cr203) intergrown or included with some of the grains of gold in the form of chromite (FeO.Cr2O3). This is justified by the fact that no alloyed chromium was found in the complete analysis of the platinum metals. The presence of Cr2O3 shows that some of the gold must have occurred in bedrock either intergrown with chromite or in contact with it. These facts are considered adequate to relate this gold genetically with the chromite and therefore indirectly with the platinum. In this connection, it is also worth mentioning that this placer gold is held weakly by a strong electromagnet, though pure gold is known to be diamagnetic.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS REGARDING GOODNEWS BAY PLATINUM DEPOSITS
Red and Susie Mountains are composed of ultrabasic rocks, and Red Mountain, except for a peripheral zone, is made up largely of a variety of peridotite, known as dunite. The platinum placers are localized mainly in the valley of Platinum Creek and its tributaries, in the valley of Clara Creek, and in the valley of the Salmon River, downstream from the mouths of these, and other gulches that drain the eastern side of Red Mountain. In other parts of the world the platinum metals are known to be associated generally, though not exclusively, with ultrabasic rocks. Therefore, as the platinum placers are localized in valleys that drain the flanks of Red Mountain, there

PLATINUM DEPOSITS OF GOODNEWS BAY DISTRICT

143

can be little doubt that the dunite and related rocks of Red Mountain are the bedrock source of the platinum metals.
The platinum metals, however, have not been found in place in Red Mountain, nor does a chemical analysis of the dunite show any traces of them, though a small quantity of platinum could not be detected in the amount of rock that is ordinarily used in making a chemical analysis. On the other hand some of the larger nuggets of platinum metals found in the placers are intergrown with chromite, and chromite is known to constitute about 0.4 percent of the dunite of Red Mountain. Moreover, an analysis of the pebbles of chromite that constitute a part of the placer concentrates shows that this chromite contains about 0.05 ounce of platinum metals to the ton. It is therefore believed that most of the platinum metals found in the placers are genetically associated with the chromite that occurs in the dunite.
It is believed that the dunite originated by the separation and sinking of crystals of olivine from a cooling magma. Most of the iron and chrome ores, having a limited miscibility in the magma, also separated at this or an earlier stage in the process of cooling. It is also inferred that the intrusive bodies of ultrabasic rock in this area, though generally lenticular in shape, approximated a vertical position from the time when they originated. It therefore follows that the dunite, chromite, and associated platinum metals were probably localized in the lower parts of the lenticular but upright intrusive masses, so that as these lenses were subsequently bared to erosion, the platinum metals began to be freed from their bedrock source. In intrusive masses, which have not been deeply eroded, the ultrabasic rocks may not therefore contain much platinum; and this is a possible explanation for the scarcity of platinum metals in the stream gravels in the vicinity of Susie Mountain.
From the localization of the placers on the east side of Red Mountain it might be inferred that the bedrock source of the platinum metals likewise was localized on this side of the mountain. This may or may not be true, but it is known that the northwest side of Red Mountain was once the site of one lobe of Goodnews Glacier. Therefore, even if platinum metals had occurred on the west side of Red Mountain, it is improbable that extensive placer deposits would be present on that side, as glacial action tends to dissipate rather than to concentrate metallic elements in gravel. Moreover, not only are the streams on that side of the mountain small, but it would also appear that insufficient time has elapsed since the retreat of the glacier for the formation of extensive Recent platinum-bearing deposits.

INDEX

Page Acknowledgments for aid__________ 116-118 Osmium, analyses of._______ 135-137,139-140 Alloys, characteristics of._________.. 132-134 percentage of, in platinum metals____ 138
physical properties of_____._ .. 133

Clara Creek, placer-mining claims on____ pi. 2

platinum from, analyses of.. 136,137,139,140,141 Palladium, analyses of.,___..... 135-137,139-140

tenor of...................... 129,130-131 physical properties of..____.- ___ 133

platinum placers on.._____-__... 128-131 Platinum, analyses of.............. 135-137,139-140

Clara Creek Mining Co., marketing by___ 135 percentage of, in platinum metals____ 138

operations by.. _____ 120,131 physical properties of....__ ..__. 133

Platinum Creek, placer-mining claims on..... pi. 2

Dry Gulch, platinum placers on___.._ 120-121

platinum from, analyses of.____ 136-136,137 platinum placers on.._____..__ 120-125

Erickson, E. T., analyses by.___ ._

142

tenor of...-...-.-.-.--...-. _... 123 Platinum metals, characteristics of.____ 132-134

chemical analyses of.__... 135-137,139-140,142

Field work................................. 115-118 marketing of......__._...-.-......- 135-142

Jox Gulch, placer-mining claims on...___ pi. 2 production of . ..

120

platinum metals from, analyses of___ 139,141 Platinum placers, general features of....__ 115-118

platinum placers on__________ 120-123 geologic environment of._____ 117,120-123,

125,126,128-130,142-143

Geologic map of the area__.___~___ 117 history and mining of.______ __ 118-120

Glaciers, evidence of _ . .. _ 130

Gold, analyses of....................... 135-136,142 Quartz Creek, placer-mining claims on... pi. 2

in placers, origin of..___________ 141

physical properties of___________ 133 Rhodium, analyses of._______ 135-137,139-140

Qoodnews Bay, platinum placers near___ 115-131 physical properties of.__________ 133

platinum deposits of, conclusions regard-

Ruthenium, analyses of._____ 135-137,139-140

ing.... ...................... 142-143 physical properties of____... ___ 133

Ooodnews Bay Mining Co., marketing by__ 136

operations by.. .......... 118-120,125,127,128 Salmon River, placer-mining claims on.__.. pi. 2

platinum from, analyses of.-... 136,137

Iridium, analyses of..........__. 135-137,139-140 platinum placers on...___ __ 127-128

percentage of, in platinum metals____ 138

tenor of_ ____._ __.. 127

physical properties of___._ ....._ 133 Silver, physical properties of..... _... 133

Snow Gulch, placer-mining claims on.... pi. 2

Ledoux & Co., analyses by____.... . 135-136

Squirrel Creek, placer gold from, analyses of.. placer-mining claims on.._ _...

142 pi. 2

platinum from, analyses of..._ ._ 136,137 Marketing of platinum metals.______ 135-142 platinum placers on............ 120-123,125-126 Medicine Creek, placer-mining claims on__ pi. 2 tenor of placers on_____ .._.__ 125-128 Mining, conditions of.____________ 118-120 Steiger, George, quoted______ .._. 141
methods of... ....... 119-120,123-125,128,131 Susie Creek, placer-mining claims on.... pi. 2 Murata, J. K., analyses by____.__._ 140

quoted....... ......; .... ... 140 Wells, R. C., analyses by...............___ 139

Wildberg Bros. Smelting & Refining Co.,

Nuggets, occurrence of________..... 126,130

analysis by_.___.. _... 138

o 145

