U. S. Geological Survey OPEN FILE REPORT This report is preliminary and has not been edited or reviewed for conformity with GeoJog^cal Survey standards or nomenclature.

1*0120^033

40

p»A\aiAou ao ps^rpa uaaq

l si juodaa «ji|f

M3dO

*J "S pue qoiAej -p *w *oan -ft -9

Ajeutui!
etu|6j]A c Aiunoo xe^jjej *S>JDOJ suj jo ssiiJsdcud [eoisAqd pue '

1- ' j$

Abstract Undisturbed cores of saprolite developed on crystalline rocks of the Piedmont Province in Fairfax County, Virginia have been obtained using a combination of She1 by tubes. Denison sampler, and modified diamond core-drilling. The principal purpose of the core study is to correlate variations in chemistry, mineralogy and texture with engineering properties throughout the weathering profile. Coring sites were chosen to obtain a maximum depth of weathering on diverse lithologies. The rocks investigated include politic schist, metagraywacke, granite, diabase and serpentinite. Four to twelve samples per core were selected, depending on thickness of 1) the weathering profile (from about 1 m in serpentinite to fnore than 30 m in pel!tic schist) and on 2) megascopic changes in saprolite character for analysis of petrography, texture, clay-mineralogy and r.ajor element chemistry. Shear strength and compressibility were determined on corresponding segments of core. Standard penetration tests were performed adjacent to coring sites to evaluate engineering properties in situ. Geochemical changes of saprolite developed from each rock type follow predictable trends from fresh rock to soil profile, with relative Increases in Si, Tt, Al, Fe'+ and 1^0; variable K; and relative loss of n. Fe , Mg, Ca, and Na. These variations are rnore pronounced in the weathering profiles over mafic and ultramafic rocks than metagraywacke. Clay minerals in granite, schist and metagraywacke saprolite ara

kaoiinlte, dioctahedral verniculite, interlayered micawermfcu' i te, and minor illite. Gibbsite is locally developed in near-surface samples of schist.
Standard penetration test data for the upoer 7 m of saprolite over schist and metagraywacke suggest alternations between stronger and weaker horizons than probably reflect variations in lithology including the presence of quartz lenses. Results for granite saprolite are most consistent but indicate lower strength. Shear strength increases fairly regularly downward in the weathering profile. The engineering behavior of diabase saprolite is controlled by a dense, plastic, near-surface clay layer (montmor?1lonite and kaolinite) overlying rock which is weathered to a granular state (grus), while engineering properties of serpentinite are determined by a very thin weathering profile.
Introduction This is a preliminary report on the study in progress of upland regolith (e.g., the material between fresh bedrock and the geomorphic surface) of the Piedmont of Fairfax County; particularly of the saprolfte which is the major component of that regolith. Saprolite Is that part of the regolith which retains the structure of the parent rock. It was defined originally by Becker (1894) for the southern Appalachians as the: "...thoroughly decomposed, earthy, but untransported rock." Some of the terms used in this report (e.g., unstructured residuum, weathered rock) are defined on figure 11.

Despite its ubiquitous occurrence over the Piedmont of the southeastern states, little is known about the basic textural, chemical, mineralogical and engineering properties of saprolite. Studies of the weathering processes which produce saprolite are numerous, and although several weathering studies have been made in the Maryland-Virginia Piedmont (Plaster and Sherwood, 1971; Cleaves, 1968, 1973; Cleaves and others, 1970, 197*0 and experience with engineering properties of saprolite has been summarized by Sowers (195^»1963) an(* Deere and Patton (1971)» no comprehensive attempt has been made, to our knowledge to study chemical, mineralogical and engineering properties.
This study is part of a broader program of investigation of environmental geology in Fairfax County that has been underway since about 197**It is hoped that the information presented here, as well as information presented in reports such as Drake and Froelich (1977) should be useful in land use planning for construction, septic system design, landfill siting, etc.
Regional Geology The geology of parts of Fairfax County has been described in several published reports (Johnson, 19&2, 196**; Seiders and others, 1975) , and has recently been revised by Drake and Froelich (1977). This map of Fairfax County which emphasizes rock types is shown in Fig. 1. The major crystalline rock types of the Piedmont of Fairfax County are metasedimentary, with compositions varying between arenaceous and argillaceous, at metamorphic grades which range from chlorite phyllites, to sillimanite schists and migmatite. Next in abundance are granitic rocks, predominantly the foliated Occoquan Adamellite in the southern part of the County (Seiders and others, 1575). Several other granitic intrusivcs n?y or nay not be related to the Occoquan batholith.
3

Rocks of mafic to ultramafic composition form a broad, generally northeast trending belt west and southwest of tne city of Fairfax. Narrower, north trending, belts of serpentinite are common in the northcentral part of Fairfax County. Broad diabase bodies are intrusive into Triassic sandstone and siltstone in the Culpeper basin in the western part of the County. Unconsolidated sediments of the Coastal Plain province underlie the eastern third of the County and are not discussed here.
The crystalline nocks other than the diabase are structurally complex. During metamorphism they were subjected to isoclinal folding and refolding (Drake and Froelich, 1977). Steeply dipping multiple foliation and joint planes are the most characteristic structural features.
Rock types investigated. Rocks In which saprolite cores were obtained include pelitic schist (unit B on fig. 1) and metagraywacke (C) (western V/issahickon schist of Hopson, 1S&M; Occoquan Adamellite (F) ; serpentinite (H); and diabase (J).
General character of sampled units. The chief metasedimentary rocks in Fairfax County comprise^ two "end-member" rock types - metagraywacke and pelitic schist - with all degrees of compositional and textural variation between the two. At 1:2^,000 scale these two types constitute mappable units, and even a third intermediate unit - metasemipelite (not shown on fig. l) - has been locally distinguished.
Saprolite on metasedimentary rocks tends to be thick. The depth to fresh bedrock in the core holes varied between about 15 m (50 ft) and 3^ m (111 ft). For mechanical reasons, several of the 6 boreholes were not continued to unweathered rock; hence, even deeper saprolite night have been encountered. In the cores recovered, the A and B so 11

horizons tended to ba minimal, typicalIv less than 60 cm (2 ft), which matches observations in roadcuts. Comnoniy, saprolite occurred within the first She 1 by tube (2 ft. = 60 cm). Downward in the drill hole the hardness is variable but in general increasing until the typically abrupt transition to weathered rock is encountered. Two characteristic drill logs, for pel 5 tic schist and rnetagraywacke, are summarized in figures 2 and 3 (columns entitled "Structure").
The Occoquan adamellite is white to light gray, mediurn-grained granitic rock with we 1J-developed foliation and textures varying between hypidiomorphic and crystalloblastic. Depth of weathering in the granite is as much as 30 TI (ICO ft). In the longer of the two cores obtained, unstructured saprolite extends to 6 m (20 ft) below the surface, and the degree of weathering diminishes in a more progressive fashion than In the metasedimentary rocks (see figure 4).
A'very thin weathering profile is developed on rocks of the naficultramafic complex (see figure 5)- Typically, the profile is less than 1 meter (3 ft) deep which is commonly renoved by erosion. Saprolite sensu stricto is virtually lacking; instead dense soil is developed containing nearly fresh rock fragments that increase in abundance downwards. The transition to virtually fresh saprolite is rather abrupt. 'Where the underlying rock is mafic (i.e., gabbroic) instead of ultramafic, development of saprolite may be somewhat more complete, but because of the close association of mafic and ultramafic rocks in the complex, this variation was not confirmed in available cores.
Saprolite over diabase is commonly relatively thin (1-2 m, 3-b ft), although locally it may be up to 10 m tHick, and consists of granular pellets (qrus) qrading downwards into ccrestones of weathered diabase, in the core obtained, the grus is overlain by dense clayey soil several
5

cm thick (see figure 6), but at many localities the dense clay exceeds 1 m in thickness.
Drill sites. Drill locations for representative rock types are shown on fig. 1 (£f figs, 2-6). An additional 6 cores from the same units were analyzed but locations and results are not included in this report. Sampling sites were chosen in order to obtain the thickest saprolite profile (e.g., those on the uplands) on well-defined rock types. At each site, a continuous core from the surface to unweathered bedrock was obtained, ^nd a standard penetration test was performed in a closely adjacent hole to a depth of 6 m (20 ft).
Techniques and procedures of drilling and sampling. All sampling was done with a Mobile B-61 truck-mounted drill. Sampling was initiated from the surface to refusal depth by means of 61 cm (24-inch) Shelby tubes. Over metasedimentary rocks this depth ranged between 1.7 and 6 m (9 and 20 ft); over Occoquan Adamellite, 1-15 m (3 1/2-50 ft); over diabase, about 1 m (3 ft), and over serpentinite *»5~60 cm (1.5-2 ft).
Several sampling methods were tried below the effective depth for the Shelby tube. The Denison sampler, because of its capacity for a high percentage of core recovery in unconsolidated material, was expected to constitute the primary sampling tool down to firm rock. In practice, however, the Denison proved excessively slow. Although yielding almost continuous cores, the Denison samples were too disturbed for engineering testing. An attempt was made to use normal core drilling with a No, 10 face discharge bit instead of the Denison, but problems were encountered including poor sample recovery due to the flushing action of cooling water. A variation of this method, using air instead of water for cooling, subsequently proved to be quite satisfactory, and

all sampling after boring No. 4 was accomplished by a combination of She1 by tube and air-cooled diamond core drilling.
Cooling was effected by a portable air compressor of 160 CFM capacity. The air compressor was coupled to the water pump by means of an adapter, Drilling was begun at 50 psi and increased approximately 2 psi per 30 cm (1 fc?ot) of depth to a maximum of about 120 psi. A sawtooth bit was used until penetration was less than about 2 in. per minute, after which a No. 10 diamond bit was substituted. This conibination of drilling/sampling techniques was found satisfactory both In terns of efficiency and rate of core '"ec-overy.
Analy t leal procedures.-- Samples ?rc~i each of the cores were split and processed according to the following flow chart:

SAMPLE

PETROGRAPHY Impregnate samples Prepare polished,
uncovered thin sections Petrographic study; X-ray analysis of unrecognized phases (plucked from section)

TEXTURE a. Disaggregate sample b. Hydrometer analysis
for 63 CLAY MINERALOGY a. Pipette sample
form 2 fraction b. X-ray diffraction of
untreated, glycolated and heated si ides

CHEMICAL ANALYSES Rapid rock analysis
of major elements Semi-quant i tat ive
spectroqraphic analysis for 60 elements Determination of Mn by atomic-absorption spectroscopy

ENGINEERING PROPERTIES Density Uniaxial Shear Triaxial Shear

Analytical results. Figures 2-6 summarize the analytical results from cores representative of the major crystalline rock types in Fairfax County.
Geochemtcal changes on each rock type follow predictable trends from fresh rock to soil profile, with relative increases in Si, Ti, Al, Fe 3+ , and 1^0; variable K; and relative loss of Fe2+ , Mg, Ca, and Na. These variations are most pronounced in the weathering profiles over mafic and ultramafic rocks, least so over metagraywacke. Clay minerals in granite, schist and metagraywacke saprolite are kaolinite, dioctahedral vermiculite, interlayered mica-vermiculite, and minor illite. Gibbsite is locally developed in near-surface samples of schist.
The engineering tests are summarized in columns headed "Blow Counts", "Unified System Classification", and "Shear Strength". Figures 7~10 serve as explanatory keys for these mechanical tests. Figure 11 summarizes the criteria for distinguishing regolith zones illustrated on figs. 2-6, and also suggests tests for evaluation of engineering behavior.
Standard penetration test data listed in figures 2-6 under the heading "Blow Counts" for the upper 7 m of saprolite over schist and metagraywacke suggest alternations between stronger and weaker horizons that probably reflect variable lithology including quartz lenses. Results for granite saprolite are more consistent but indicate lower strength. Shear strength increases fairly regularly downward in the weathering profile. The engineering behavior of diabase saprolite is controlled by a dense, plastic, near-surface clay layer (montmor?1lonite and kaolinite) overlying grus-like weathered rock, while engineering properties of serpentinite are determined by a very thin weathering profile.

The following are general observations on the engineering properties

of saprolIte:

1. Not all of the engineering properties vary singly as a function

of depth. In metasedimentary units, the heterogeneous composition of

the parent rock (e. g., arenaceous to argillaceous) greatly influences

the final weathered products. The mechanical properties of the

weathered products, such as strength and compressibility are highly

variable both vertically and laterally.

2. For a given blpw count, the shear strength of the granite is

greater than that of the more micaceous units (metapelite and metagraywacke).

3- Joints in the saprolite frequently control the laboratory measured

(triaxial or uniaxial) shear strength of saprolite. Shear surfaces

often developed in the joint fillings.

k. In granitic rocks, thin continuous clay-rich seams or residuum

often traverse the saprolite samples. These seams are zones of weakness.

5- Saprolite of the highly micaceous rocks (metapelite) can have a

very low density and high mica content. It has been suggested by other

workers (Sowers, 1963, Deere and Patton, 1971) that saprolite of this

nature may be susceptible to continuous, long-term deformation and

settling.

6. The existence of highly micaceous or chloritic foliation shears

may be of major Importance to the local strength of saprolite or rock

as a foundation material. Where present, these shear zones may be of

much more significance to engineering behavior of the site than are the

general regolith characteristics. Contacts between rock units of

greatly different tecture (e.g., pelitic schist-metaqraywacke contact)

commonly exhibit shear zones; thick pelitic rocks also cormonly exhibit

shear zones.

10

Summary This report represents an initial attempt to correlate mineralogical and chemical variations with engineering properties of the piedmont regolith along the weathering profile. Fig. 11 summarizes our observations in the context of a classification scheme for the regolfth. The present report is preliminary and will be superseded by a fuller version containing more of our basic data. Meanwhile, the results reported here may provide some impetus for further research in different parts of the piedmont.
H

BIBLIOGRAPHY Becker, G. F. (189*0, Reconnaissance of the gold fields of the southern
Appalachias: U.S. Geol . Survey Ann. Rept. # 16, pt. 3., p. 257 -33] . Cleaves, E. T., 1968, Piedmont and Coastal Plain geology along the
Susquehanna Aqueduct, Baltimore to Aberdeen, Maryland: Maryland Geol . Survey Rept. of Investigations, no- 8, 39 P« ____ 1973, Chemical weathering and landforms in a portion of Baltimore County, Maryland [PhD. dissert.]: Baltimore, Maryland, Johns Hopkins Univ., 104 p,
*
Cleaves, E, T. t Godfrey. A. E., and Bricker, 0. P., 1970, Geoche^ical balance of small watershed and its geomorphic implications: f>ol . Soc. of America Bull. 81, p. 3015-3032.
Cleaves, E. T. , Fisher, D. W., and Bricker, 0. P., 197**, Chemica] v.-eathering of serpentinite in the eastern Piedmont of Maryland: Geol. Soc. of America Bull. 85, p. ^37'W.
Deere, D. U. and Patton, F., 1971, Slope stability in residual bolHFourth Panamer ican Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, p. 87-
Drake, A. A., Jr., and Froelich, A. J., 1977, Bedrock map of Fairfax County, Virginia: U.S. Geol. Survey open-file report 77~523-
Hopson, C. A., 19&4, The crystalline rocks of Howard and Montgomery Counties, in the Geology of Howard and Montgomery Counties: Maryland Gi-ol. Survey, p. 27-215.
Johnson, P. M. , 196*1, Geology and ground-water resources of V/ashi nqton, D.C., and vicinity: U.S. Geol. Survey Water-Supply Paper 1776, 97 P-
P./vf.^ MC2 t (J^C'u OUx^* CHztur^C -lOrr>er r<?^ k/roe.£ of'
12

Plaster, R. W., and Sherwood, W. C., 1971, Bedrock weathering and residual soil formation in central Virginia: Geol. See. of America Bull. 82, p. 2313-2826.
Seiders, V. M. at al, 3975, Age of plutonism and tectonism and a new minimum age limit on the Glenarn Series ?n the northeast Virginia Piedmont near Occcquan: Am. Jour. Sci. 275, p. 481-511.
Sowers, G. F., 195^» Soil problems in the southern Piedmont region: Proceedings ASCE, V. 80, Separate k\ 6.
___ 1963, Engineering properties of residual soils derived from igneous and metamorphic rocks: Second Panamerican Conference on Soi-; Mechanics and Foundations Engineering, Brazil, p. 39~62.

I I lustrations Figure 1. Fairfax County Geologic Map showing coring site locations
2. Meta pelite analytical log 'w*
3- Metagraywacke analytical log 4. Occoquan adanelllte analytical log 5. Serpentinite analytical log 6. Diabase analytical log 7. Unified Classification System for fine-grained materials 8. Plasticity for laboratory identification of fine-grained
so i 1 s 9. Engineering behavior of compacted materials, as related
to unified system classification 10. Relation of allowable foundation pressure to standard
penetration resistance blow count for residuun on

Page

11. Descriptive classification of the regolith overlying ' crystalline rocks for geologic and engineering properties (with special reference to rock types of the Virginia-Maryland Piedmont)

CHEMISTRY (gnu/cm3)
Ouooi

METAPELITE

STRUCTURE
10
id id HO
50'
to S .5. /fte*Q.f»&4e

/.CLAY 10 MO

MINERALOGY

BLOW COUNTS

iitt
id is
IlSi 20

UNIFIED SYSTEM SHEAR STRENGTH

CLASSIFICATION

(Kgm/cm 3 )

ML
5M II ML II

y- vnuuuuatt
- lll-tTt

it

CHEMISTRY (gm/cm*)

O.OM 0.01

o.i

METAGRAYWACKE

STRUCTURE

DENSITY (gm/cmj )

Of 10 1.5 2.0 2-5

20*
*>'

50 GO 70' Bti
100'
110 ..

MINERALOGY

BLOW COUNTS

II 16 if
u

UNIFIED SYSTEM CLASSIFICATION

SHEAR STRENGT (Kgm/cm2 )

ML
SM

log.

K* lou V'VuM 1-lU.tTC

CHEMISTRY (gm/cm3 )

0.001

0.01

0.1

GRANITE

STRUCTURE

DENSITY (gm/cm1)

1.0
p V) Djinjf
.«
--ar-
: 10'
1
20' a//a//m///i,,
\ SO* 'ti'/it,.

1.5 20 tS

'%%% i 10

' i So'

'ft'/* /
''"'"'',

: CO
i > 10
1

%
'yy%'

MINERALOGY

BLOW COUNTS

f 1C' 20'

UNIFIED SYSTEM CLASSIFICATION

SHEAR STRENC (Kgm/cm?)

(L U.
HA-at
NO.
Nil-MM

I »

!£ »

tllll* L»«"

K: KMUNITI.
M"
X

SERPENTINITE

CHEMISTRY (gm/cm 3 )

0001 Ott

Oil

STRUCTURE 1.0

DENSITY (gm/cm 3)
to 2.5 10

\1 J,»A *A V

iW..

MINERALOGY
0 5 10'

BLOW COUNTS

UNIFIED SYSTEM CLASSIFICATION

CL-CM

DIABASE

CHEMISTRY (gm/cm 3)
O.Ot O.I

1.0

STRUCTURE
15

DENSITY (gm/cm 3)
10 I*

»^* itf T*A H*ABM.A*

M^ LA

MINERALOGY
0'
r* 5
10'
Vt*

BLOW COUNTS
10
ii
MOO »IOO

UNIFIED S\ CLASSIFO
MLICL CH *H

SHEAR STRENGTH (Kgm/cm2)

T7-

UNIFIED CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM FOR SANDS AND FINE-GRAINED MATERIALS

Major Divisions

United Class. System

Typical Names

Field Identification Procedures

scco.

en Cm

en en cu T3 C C ^:

Well-graded sands, gravelly sands, SW little or no fines

CO

0S

(0 n

8f| 8 oM ? o>
o .2 N w ««
T3 "~ O
g5 -cgo .«8

§0).

0« (0 IB
«w .«1 <5 f

CO g (0 O
_j^

SP

Poorly graded sands or gravelly sand, little or no fines.

i 1 8 * (0 O _

w 1 §Co 01 2 £«J ^ O (5 I z

«
c
I

§ a SFwianitedhs (Apreciable ofaimnoeufnst) SM Silty sands, sand-silt mixtures

£ s £ "5

:£
w o

o -9 52

2§ o 2

sc Clayey sands, sand-clay mixtures

Wide range m gra n size and substantial amounts of all intermediate particle sizes
Predominantly one size or a range of sizes with some intermediate sizes missing
Nonplastic fines or fines with low plasticity.
Plastic fines

o
M
W
O
§.t9/>
CM
Z6 J2 c £I
1s 0« 2? E'
s< 2
-1 G/
!
C ^

to
O.
M
0)
;ge
s:
"o3 « 2
8» ^S
«
§ CM
z
"U p

£ «s o
« ^m
S I1
C -o ;/) 5cr w<f>
% ^~
*>. -if-. m° O E|

Identification Procedures on Fraction Smaller than No. 40 Sieve Size

Dry Strength (Crushing characteristics)

Dilatancy (Reaction to
shaking;

Toughness (Consistency
near PL)

Inorganic silts and very fine sands Silty or

ML clayey fine sands or clayey silts with slight plasticity

None to slight

Quick to slow

Inorganic clays of low to medium plasticity

CL gravelly clays sandy clays silt/ clays

Med urn to nigh

lean clays

None to very slow

None Medium

Inorganic silts micaceous fine sandy or

MH silty soils elastic silts

Silent to med'um Slow to none Sdgnt to med urn

^s. J ^~

CH Inorganic clays of h-qr» pi^T'C-ty f a* clays Higr> to (Tf.-ry ^<<;h

None

M 'j-

5

fu;v-t 8
80

Plasticity Chart for Laboratory Identification of Fine-Grainod Soils

/70 /
X60 jT
CH /

50 X^ s

^

40

X
X

^r 30 f
CL >^ MH
xi20 > ^

10 s^X

CL-!M«y L/ ML
n
0 1.0 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120

Liquid Limit, LL

ENGINEERING BEHAVIOR OF COMPACTED MATERIALS, AS RELATED TO UNIFIED SYSTEM CLASSIFICATION

TYPICAL NAMES
OF SOIL GROUPS

IMPORTANT ENGINEERING PROPERTIES

UNIFIED SYSTEM CLASS

PERMEABILITY WHEN
COMPACTED

SHEAR

COMPRESSIBILITY

STRENGTH

WHLN

WHEN

COMPACTED

COMPACTED

AND

AND

SATUHATl D

SATURATED

WORKABILITY AS A
CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL

STRUCTURAL PERFORMANCE AS COMPACTED ROADWAY FILL FROST HEAVL
POSSIBLE

OTHER IMPORTANT CHARACTERISTICS WHEN COMPACTED

WELL-GRADED SANDS, GRAVELLY SANDS. LITTLE OR NO FINES

SW

PERVIOUS

EXCELLENT

NEGLIGIBLE

EXCELLENT

EXCELLENT

POORLY-GRADED SANDS. GRAVELLY SANDS, LITTLE OR NO FINES
SILTY SANDS, POORLYGRADED SAND-SILT MIXTURES
CLAYEY SANDS, POORLYGRADED SAND-CLAY MIXTURES
INORGANIC SILTS AND VERY FINE SANDS, ROCK FLOUR. SILTY OR CLAYEY FINE SANDS WITH SLIGHT PLASTICITY
INORGANIC CLAYS OF LOW TO MEDIUM PLASTICITY. GRAVELLY CLAYS. SANDY CLAYS, SILTY CLAYS. LEAN CLAYS
iNiORGANlC SILTS. MICACEOUS FINE SANDY OR SILTY SOILS LLASTIC SILTS '
INORGANIC CLAYS OF HIGH f>l ASTICITY FAT CLAVS

SP SM
sc
ML
CL MH CH

PERVIOUS
SEMIPERVIOUS TO
IMPERVIOUS IMPERVIOUS
SEMIPERVIOUS TO
IMPERVIOUS
IMPERVIOUS
SEMIPERVIOUS ' TO
IMPERVIOUS
IMPERVIOUS

GOOD
GOOD GOOD
TO FAIR
FAIR
FAIR
FAIR TO
POOR POOR

VERY LOW LOW LOW
MEDIUM
MEDIUM HIGH HIGH

FAIR FAIR GOOD
FAIR
GOOD TO
FAIR
POOR POOR

GOOD

FAIR
FAIR TO GOOD

HIGHLY EROSIVE

POOR

HIGHLY EROSIVE

FAIR

POOR POOR

HluH VGU'Mt CHANCif

Relation of allowable foundation pressure to standard penetration resistance blow count for residuum on Piedmont rocks, for column loads of 25,000 to 100,000 Ibs. Band width represents range of allowable pressures used by different designers in Fairfax County area.

3a ^? °o
C/)
1; c/) 5v$, r&vi-
0

Standard Penetration Resistance Blow Count, N

