(~oo)

/~1r

--

REsoURCE COMPfLATION CT/0
Geology-of the

Shinarump No.1

Uranium Mine,

Seven Mile Canyon Area,

.Grand County, Utah

By W. Io Finch

~,

. . ' • .. r~rf~ ,. .

. ...· . ~

Trace Elements ln'Yestigations Report 287
~ JhL 0'~.r,'.
& .s~c- 3 .3 '-. ·
UNITED ST~TES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Geology and Mineralogy This document consists df 36 pages . plus 3 figures. S!lrles A
·. r to:lf\li!ED ' ;STA~ES .:..DEPARTMENT OF ' THE > 'INTERIOR
:~; .GEOLOG1CAL :BURYEY

GEOLOGY OF THE SHINARUMP NO. 1 URANIUM MINE. SEVEN Ml!,E CANYON AREA, GRAND COUNT¥!. UTAH* By W. I. Finch October .1953

Trace Elements Investigations Report 287
~?de/ 0~/s;(

Gs~e 3.;?

·

·. This preliminary·report is distributed without editorial and technical review for conformity with official standards and nomenclature. It is not for public inspection or quotation.

*This report concerns work done on behalf ,of the Division of Raw Materials of the U. S. Atomic Energy Commission.

2 USGS - - TEI-287 GE'OLOGY -AND _MINERALOGY

Distribution -(Series A)

American Cyanamid Company, Winchester

Argonne National Laboratory _, .... .. .

Atomic Energy Commission, Washington .

. •. •• .

:Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus . • • • • • • . •

Carbide and Carbon Chemicals Company, Y.-12 Area - • • • •

Division of Raw Mate~ials, ,Albuquerque

Division of Raw Matehals, Butte . • ... - .

Division of Raw Materials, Denver

Division of Raw Materials, Douglas

Division of Raw Materials, Grants •

Division of Raw Materials, Hot Springs .

Division of Raw Materials, Ishpeming

Division of Raw Materials, New York . . . . .

Division of Raw Materials, Phoenix •

Division of Raw Materials, Richfield

Division of Raw Materials, Salt Lake City

Division of Raw Materials, Washington ••

Dow Chemical <:;ompany, Pittsburg .. -· • •

~xploration Division, Grand Junction Operations Office · .

Grand Junction Operations Office . • • • •

Technical Information Service, Oak Ridge • • • •

Tennessee Valley Authority, Wilson Dam • •

U. S. Geological Survey:

Alaskan Geology Branch, Washington . .. •

Fuels Branch, Washington . • .. • • •. •

Geochemistry and Petrology Branch, Washington . • • •

Geophysics Branch, Washington • • •

• • • .. •

'Mineral Deposits Branch, Washington

• _. • ...

E. H. Bailey. San Francisco

K. L. Buck, Denver

J. R. Cooper, Denver

N. M. Denson, Denver

C. E. Dutton, Madison

W. I. Finch, Denver

R. P. Fischer, Grand Junction

L. S. Gardner, Albuquerque

M. R. Klepper, Washington . • • . • • • •

A• .H. Koschmann, Denver ••

R. A. Laurence, Knoxville •

D. M. Lemmon, Washington

J. D. Love, Laramie --· ... .. .

R. G. Petersen, Plant City . •

-R. J. Roberts, Salt Lake City

Q. D. Singewald, Beltsville

J. F. Smith, Jr. , Denver

R. W. Swanson, Spokane

A. E. _Weissenborn, Spokane

W. P. Williams, Joplin

TEPCO ~- Denv·er:

TEPCO ti RPS,.. Washingto1J.'l

(Includ-ing master)

No. of copies 1
1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 1 1 1 3 1
10 1 6 1
1 1 1 1 12 1 2 1 1 1 1 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 4
91

3

CONTENTS

Abstract •••...

Introduetion • .

·General geology

Stratigraphy

Cutler formation

Moenkopi formation

.•••.

Shinarump conglomerate and Chinle formations

Jurassic rocks

.. .. .. ..

.Structure . . . . " ...

History and production

Ore deposits

Mineralogy

. ••. . •• •.

Petrology

.......•.•.

Habits of ore bodies .. . • . • • • . .. • • • • • • . •

Spectrographic study

Age determinations of uraninite

Origin of deposit . . .. . . . . . . ... .

Conclusions

Literature cited

Unpublished reports .

Appendix A ~ Stratigraphic section

Appendix B - Group number classification

Page
5 6 6 8 8 8 9 10 10 11 11 13 17 24 25
~27
28
31 31 32 36

ILLUSTRATIONS

Figure 1. Map of part of the Colorado Plateau showing the location of the Shinarump No. 1 mine and the distribution of uranium deposits in the Shinarump and Chinle formations . • . . • . • • .

7

2. Geologic maps and sections of the Seven Mile Canyon and

Shinarump No. 1 mine areas, Grand County, Utah

••••••••••... In envelope

3. Paragenesis of uraninite and sulfide minerals, Shinarump No. 1 mine, Grand County. Utah

15

4. Photomicrographs of polished and thin sections from the Shinarump No. 1 mine, Grand County. Utah . . . • •

16

5. Cumulative curves of samples from the Seven Mile Canyon area, Grand County, Utah • • • • • • • • .• • . • • •

21

6. Frequency curves of samples from the Seven Mile c;anyon area, Grand County, .Utah • • • . • . .• • • • • .• • • • . • . . • • • • • • .• • 22

7. Cumulative and frequency curves of ore-bearing and barren siltstone from Shinarump No. 1 mine, Grand County, Utah

23

4

ILLUSTRATIONS--Continued

Page

Figure 8. Geologic map and section of the Shinarump No• .1 mine,

Grand County, Utah • • • • • • • .. • • • •

• • • • • • .• • • • . . • In envelope

9. Selected wall maps from the Shinarump No. 1 mine, Grand County, Utah • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • . • . • • • • • . • . . In envelope

TABLES

Table 1. List of samples from Seven Mile Canyon area •. .. . . • . . • • • . . • . . . • •
2. Geometric mean values (in percent) of elements contained 'in barren and uranium-bearing rock from the Shinarump No. 1 mine, copper-bearing rock from nearby copper deposits, and uranium-bearing rock from a nearby dep()Sit in the Morrison formation • • .• • • • • • • • • .• • . .. • • • • .• • • .. • • • • . .

18 26

5

GEOLOGY . O~ THE' SHINARUMP NO. ' 1 'URANIUMMINEj. SEV~N MILE CANYON AREA, GRAND _OOUNll¥~ U'l,'AH '

By W. il.· Finch

ABSTRACT

The Shinarump No. 1 uranium mine is located about 12 miles northwest of Moab, Utah, in the

Seven Mile Canyon area, Grand County, Utah. A study was made of the geology of the Shinarump No. 1

mine in order to determine the habits.• ore controls, and possible origin of the deposit. , ~, ; ""c 1

' ~\, \1 '\ ~~ .

Rocks of Permian,

Triassic,

and Jurassic

age

crop

out

in the

area

ma

pped,0

.,..)
Uranium

.
deposits

are

found in three zones in the lower 25 feet of the Upper Triassic Chinle formation. The Shinarump No. 1

mine, which is in the lowermost zone, is located on the west flank of the Moab anticline near the

Moab fault.

The Shinarump No. 1 uranium deposit consists of discontinuous lenticular ,layers of mineralized rock,

irregular in outline, that, in general, follow the bedding. Ore minerals, mainly uraninite; impregnate
c. . -v VV\;"'-I'Y
the rock. High-grade seams o(uraninite and chalcocit~ occur along bedding planes~ Formation of

uraninite is later than or simultaneous with most sulfides. Chalcocite may be of two ages, with some

being later than uraninite. Uranin.ite and chalcocite are concentrated in the poorer sorted parts of

siltst?nes. Guides to ore in the Seven Mile Canyon area inferred from the study of the Shinarump No. 1

deposit are the presence of bleached siltstone, ~opper sulfides, and carbonaceous matter. Results of
spectrographic analysis indicate that th~ mineralizing~biutt'ns contained important amounts of barium,

vanadium, uranium. and copper as well as lesser amounts of strontium, chromium, . boron, yttrium,

lead, .and zinc.
Th~ origin of the Shinarump No. 1 deposit is thought to be hydrothermal r\,J..f,). c~ ·- •. t·~\~ \l .:v- (t.t,..~ 1·

(

6

The Shinarump No. 1 uranium mine is located about 12 miles northwest of Moab, Utah, in the Seven Mile Canyon area, Grand County, .Utah (fig~ 1). A road about a quaner of a mile long connects
the mine area with U. s. Highway 160. The mineralized horizons crop out along a northwest~trending
escarpment paralleling Highway 160. Vegetation in the area is sparse. A study was made of the geology of t,he Shinarump No. 1 m~ne in order to determine the habits,
ore controls, and possible origin of the deposit. This study was made by the U. S. Geological Survey on behalf of the Division of Raw Materials of the Atomic Energy Commission. Vance Thornburg, owner of the claims, was most cooperative and helpful throughout the investigation.
Field study began in January 1952 and was carried on intermittently until Aprill953. The Shinarump No. 1 mine workings were mapped in detail by tape and open-sight alidade early in 1952. Later a planetable map was made of the area surrounding the mine to relate the..mine geology to the stratigraphic
and structural features. A total of 31 samples of ore-bearing and barren rock were taken in the area and
analyzed chemically and spectrographically. Stratigraphic sections were measured near the mine and in Little Canyon south of Seven Mile Canyon.
Previous work in the area includes a study of the geology of the area between the Green and Colorado Rivers by McKnight (1940) and recent studies of the Seven Mile Canyon area. in connection with exploration by the Atomic Energy· Commission by Droullard (1951) and Droullard and Jones (1952).

·GENERAL GE,OLOGY
Rocks of Permian, Triassic, and Jurassic age crop out in ;:~he area mapped. Uranium-bearing rock
occurs in lower beds of the Upper Triassic rocks. Copper-bearing rock occurs in a large talus blo~k that may be Cretaceous Dakota sandstone and in the Moab fault gouge zone. Outside the Shinarump No• .1 mine area, uranium-bearing rock also occurs in the Upper Jura~sic Morrison formation (fig. 2). Copper-bearing rock occurs along the Moab fault northwest of the area mapped.

.·....

1
N

f)
Bid:~ i~ .. [;

e Uranium deposit or group of deposits in the Shinarump conglomerate
e Uranium deposit or group of deposits in the Chinle formation

I
l

-- I

.l -y'

<'b i

Figure 1.

MAP OF PART OF THE COLORADO PLATF.AU SHCfi!NO THE
LOCATION OF THE SHINARUMP NO. 1 MINE AREA AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF UlUNIUII DEPOSITS IN THE SHINARUKP AND CHINLE JORJIATIONS

8

The nearest" igneous rocks crop out in the La Sal Mountain laccolith about 20 miles to the southeast. The major structural features are the Moab anticline and Moab fault. .The general geology of the surrounding .area is gi¥en by McKnight (1940). Below is a brief discussion of the stratigraphy and structure of th~ Shinarump No. 1 mine area.

Stratigraphy

In the Shinarump No. 1 mine area, the Permian Cutler formation, .Triassic Moenkopi, ShinaruJ:!lp.

and Chinle formations, and Jurassic ·{?) Wingate sandstone form an escarpment along the west side of

the Moab fault. .The Upper Jurassic Morrison formation on the \east side of the fault has been faulted

against the Cutlet·'formation • . Thus, in the area mapped, Jurassic rocks between the Wingate and

Morrison are not exposed. A measured section of the rocks near the mine is included as Appendix A of

this report.

Cutler formation

.r

Only the upper 66 feet of the total 1,. 000 feet or more of the Permian Cutler ~ormation is exposed

in the area mapped. The exposed Cutler consists of medium- to coarse-grained sandstone and muddy sand~

stone and pale:..red shale. Bleaching along fractures and bedding planes is common• . Cro~s-laminated

sandstone forms a prominent rounded ledge near the top of the .Cutler. Locally along the Moab anticline

an angular and erosional unconformity exists between the overlying Lower Triassic Moenkopi and the

Cutler. However, the contact between Triassic and Permian rocks in the Shinarump Nbo 1 mine area is difficult to ·.det~rmine.

Moenkopi formation
The Lower Triassic Moenkopi formatibn is 20 feet thick in the measured section near the Shinarump No. 1 mine (Appendix A) and pinches out about 450 feet to the north. A few miles south~ the Moenkopi attains a thickness of about 450 feet. Thin-bedded shale and ~t;.t..ds.too~ and massive sandstone make up the Moenkopi beds. A distinct moderate redd~sh-brown color, abundance of mica, and ripple:-marking

9
characterize the Moenkopi. The overlying Upper Triassic beds were deposited on an erosional surface formed on the Moenkopi and, in places, on the Cutler.
Shinarump conglomerate and Chinle formations
The Upper Triassic Shinarump conglomerate is absent in most of the area mapped. McKnight showed that the Shinarump conglomerate pincl}es out along an irregular east-west line about 15 miles north of the intersection of the Green and Colorado Rivers, and only isolated outcrops of Shinarump conglomerate were mapped north of this line. One such isolated outcrop was mapped in the vicinity of Little Canyon (fig. 2). The Shinarump conglomerate in Little Canyon ranges from 5 to 10 feet in thickness and consists of a friable, white, coarse-grained to conglomeratic quartz sandstone. The Shinarump becomes discontinuous and lenticular near the northern edge of this outcrop. The Chinle siltstone and fine -grained sandstone truncate many of the Shinarump lenses. .In an open cut adjacent to the Shinarump No. 1 mine, a white coarse-grained to conglomeratic quartz sand lens corresponding to the Shinarump conglomerate is truncated by the fine -grained sediments containing the ore deposit. Thus, the Shinarump north of the main area of deposition was deposited as small thin lenses or channel-fills and was, at least in part, re,-noved before or during the deposition of the overlying Chinle.
The Upper Triassic Chinle formation is 297 feet thick in the section measured at the mine. In the Seven Mile Canyon area, the Chinle formation ;may be divided into a lower and an upper member. The base of a prominent ledge of fine -grained sandstone and limestone pebble conglomerate that is characterized by slump-bedding, marks the division of the two members. .The lower member is composed of thin- and irregular-bedded light-green to pale-reel siltstone, sandstone, and limestone pebble conglomerate. Much of this member is covered by talus. A limestontf pebble conglomerate bed about 10 feet above the base of the Chinle serves as a " marker bed" in the Shinarump No. 1 mine area (see section A-B-C, fig. 2). The upper member is composed mostly of pale-red shale and sandstone which forms for the most part a covered slope. Near the Moab anticline, the comact b~tween the Chinle and the Wingate sandstone is a local unconformity.

10
Many of the uranium deposits in the area between the Green and Colorado Rivers lie near the northern edge or north of the pinchout of the Shinarump conglomerate (fig. 1).1 In the Seven Mile Canyon area,
-" •
the uranium dep·osits _lie north of the Shinarump outcrop in Little Canyon. Thus, the uranium deposits are related to the edge of Shinarump deposition on a regional and local scale.
Uranium-bearing rock in the Seven Mile Canyon area is found in many zones in the lower member of the Chinle, but the ore deposits are found mainly in three zones in the lower 25 feet of the Chinle (section A-B-C, fig. 2). The Shinarump No. 1 mine is in the lowermost ore zone.
Jurassic rocks
The Jurassic(?) Wingate sandstone consists of massive yellowish-gray fine-grained sandstone that weathers pale red and is characterized by surface coatings of black desert varnish. In the Seven Mile Canyon area the Wingate, which forms a massive cliff, is over 200 feet thick.
In the vicinity of the Shinarump No. 1 mine the Brushy Basin member of the Upper Jurassic Morrison formation is faulted against the Permian and Triassic rocks. The Brushy Basin consists mainly of light-green mudstone. Boulders of the Cretaceou~ Burro Canyon or Dakota formations cover some of the Bmshy Basin slope.
Structure
The Shinarump No. 1 mine is located on the west flank of the Moab anticline and is about 700 feet west of the Moab fault. The beds strike N. 1501. E. and dip so NW. at the mine. The joints occur in two sets, one major set strikes N. 5Qi ·7:50 W. and dips 5oo NE·.. to vertical, and a minor set strikes N. 35°-70° E. and ~1ps; 700 SE. to vertical..
The Moab anticline, a result of salt intrusion, extends about 15 miles northwest of the Colorado River. The Moab fault, a normal fault, lies a short distance southwest of the crest of the Moab anticline. The fault extends about 30 miles northwest from the Colorado River and has a general trend of about N. 45° W. ' nearly parallel to the axis of the Moab anticline. 111 the Shinarump No. 1 mine area, the fault has a maximum displacement of about 1, 800 feet and dips about 650 NE. It makes a gentle turn to the west near the Shinarump Nos. 1 and 3 mines.

11
The Moab anticline was in existence at the end of the Permian as shown by the angular and erosional unconformity between the Moenkopi and Cutler formations. McKnight reports that the deformation was renewed in mid-Triassic, prior to the deposition of the ore-bearing Chinle beds, and was resumed once again during the Laramide orogeny at the end of the Cretaceous. However, Stokes and Phoenix ( 1948) and Shoemaker (1951), :find in similar structures on the Colorado Plateau, that the intrusion 6f salt was continuous from Permian to Upper Jurassic. The author believes that the Moab anticline had a similar history. McKnight correlates the faulting along the Moab Valley anticline with the normal faulting ofthe Wasatch Plateau that is later than pre-Eocene folding and is possibly late Tertiary. The Moab fault may be related to the Laramide orogeny or the collapse of the salt structures later in the Tertiary
'-.. ......... ..,~ '
or Quaternary periods. Field relations are so obscure that the dating of the Moab fa:taillt immnrullltalin.
The Shinarump No. 1 mine was discovered in February 1948 by Gordon Babbel and Nicholas Murphy of Moab, Utah. During the following year claims were staked throughout the Seven Mile Canyon area• .A few tons of ore were shipped in 1949. The mines were idle during 1950. In 1951, mining from several prospects was resumed and since then has been continued intermittently. Over a thousand tons of ore were shipped from the Shinarump No. 1 mine between 1948 and January 1953. .The Shinarump Nos. 1, 3 ; ilnd 4 mines a.r e.; owned by the Thornburg Mining Company, Grand Junction, Colorado.
ORE DEPOSITS
Copper-bearing rocks occur separate from uranium-bearing rocks in the Shinarump No. 1 mine area. Copper-bearing rock is found along the Moab fault and in a talus block that is thought to be Dakota sandstone of Cretaceous age. Copper carbonates are found along fractures and bedding planes as well as disseminated in sandstone in a prospect in the talus block. Fractured rock along the fault in an abandoned shaft at the base of the talus block Cfontains copper carbonates. The copper prospects are not commercial in size or grade. No uranium is associated with the copper.
The uranium-bearing material in the Shinarump No. 1 mine area occurs mainly in three zones in the lower 25 feet of the Chinle formation . The zones include, in ascending order, a basal siltstone

12
unit, the top of the overlying limestone-pebble,conglomerate .''marker bed", and an irregular dominantly siltstone zone 5 to 10 feet above the conglomerate (fig. 2}.
The highest zone consists of small calcareous .nodules of Mich concentrations of uranium minerals associated mainly with wood and carbonaceous trash in greenish siltstone and minor limestone-pebble conglomerate beds. Borne -wood is almost completely ·replaced by uraninite which, in places, has been altered to becquerelite. If the frequency of occurrence of nodules is great enough, an economic deposit results. At the Shinarump No. 3 mine (fig. 2} this zone, although discon~inuous, is as much as 3 feet thick.
The middle zone is in the upper part of the conglomerate '·'marker bed". Limestone pebbles are rimmed and, in part, replaced by uraninite. This conglomerate is mineralized north of the Shinarump No. 1 mine (fig. 2}. Most of the uranium-bearing material in these two zones is associated with calcite nodules or limestone pebbles and gray or green rock.
The Shinarump No. 1 mine is in the lowermost ore zone. The zone is made up mostly of siltstone with.some interbeds of mudstone, sandstone, and conglomerate. .It ranges from 5 to 10 feet itl thickness.
cf.Where this zone is mineralized, the beds are bleached from red to gray and gr~n. The bleaching
the ore -bearing beds extends from 1 to 15 feet laterally beyond the limits of the deposit and the bleached area is, in general, saucer shaped. The limestone-pebble conglomerate "marker bed" is fairly uniform and massive throughout the area except above the Shinarump No. 1 deposit and above the deposit in the lower uranium-bearing zone at the Shinarump No. 4 prospect. The thinning and less massive character of this "marker bed" above the deposits in the lower zone may be significant in prosp.ecting for ore in the Seven Mile Canyon area.
On the basis of the major metal content, ura'nium deposits of the Colorado Plateau may be divided into vanadium-\J,fanium, copper-uraniuhl, and uranium _2!$deposits. The Shinarump No. 1 deposit contains only minor amounts of copper ari9 vanadium and thus, is a uranium ~deposit. Oxidation of the uranium ~deposits such as the Shinarump No. 1 is generally slight and deposits of this type are less obvious to the prospector because secondary uranium minerals are scarce at the outcrop.

13
MINERALOGY
Other writers have studi~d the mineralogy of the Seven Mile Canyon area (Weeks, 1952, and Rosenzweig in report by Droullard and Jones, 1952). Only the mineralogy of the Shinarump No, 1 mine is discussed here.
Uraninit~ (pitchblende), uo2, is the principal uranium mineral, It occurs as microscopic grains
mixed with chalcocite and other sulfides replacing carbonaceous material and disseminated in siltstone. Rich concentrations of uraniilite pccur in seams as much as a half an inch thick along bedding planes.
Some uraninite is slightly altered to a burnt-orange material resembling gummite. Halos of this
material are present about unaltered uraninite, Schroeckingerite NaCa 3(U02)(C03)3(S04)F·10H2o, a pale yellowish-green mineral, and becquerelite 2003. 3H2o, a yellowish-orange mineral occur along .
fractures and bedding planes near the edges of the deposit nearest the surface. No secondary vanadiumuranium minerals were found,
The sulfides present in the ore are chalcocite, pyrite, bornite, chalcopyrite, and blue chalcocite (digenite ?, solid solution of covellite and chalcocite), -All the sulfides, except the blue chalcocite, occur as scattered grains in both barren and uranium-bearing rock. ·Chalcocite and pyrite are more abundant in the uranium -bearing rock. Uraninite is associated with all the sulfides but most commonly with pyrite and chalcocite. Although much of the chalcocite looks like galena, no galena was found in this study. Some malachite is found coating chalcocite.
Gangue materials indude barite, calcite, gypsum, and carbonaceous matter. · .Carbonaceous matter in the form of leaves, twigs, and small pieces of wood is most abundant right above the uranium-bearing beds. There is no megascopic difference in the physical prop~rties of barren and radioactiv~· carbonaceo'us matter. .Limonite is rare whereas hematite is abundant in places.
In both barren and uranium -bearing rock, the quartz has been etched and crushed. Bornite, chalcocite, pyrite, uraninite, calcite, and barite are later than etbhing. Fractures in crushed quartz are either void or contain calcite. Uraninite, pyrite, and chalcocite are associated with poorly sorted parts of a rock and, in general, follow bedding planes. Stringers of these minerals wrap around_:land are deflected by the large quartz grains. Many blebs o( uraninite and pyrite are zoned with the uraninite forming rims

14
ab.out fine>:-,gra..in'ed pyrite. Pyrite was observed in very fine fractures in siltstone, Chalcocite occurs in vertical veinlets as much as half a millimeter wide that strike east~west. Nuclear ~ track plates on thinsections of ~these veinlets indicated the absence of radioactive minerals. However. copper and uranium minerals extend outward along bedding planes away from these fractures. Calcite and more rarely barite have filled voids in the rock.
Paragenesis of uraninite and sulfides from the Shinarump No. 1 mine is given in figure 3. The <a,rt~::>.,;';­ ~ M'~tl't.iot1i:rt.'lihe ~diagram is ·showh ·wf th ttie.:drcutar . P"iagr~m t.(Rtlb.entson : a\n:d 1Vraud~ver,:) 1)3 5:2}·.to cmnpa:ne the two methods of showing paragenesis. The circular diagram shows the JIDDinerals observed in contact; pyrite, for example, was observed in contact with only uraninite and chalcoptte. The line diagram shows that some pyrite is later than chalcopyrite even though the two were never observed in contact. It is diffic.J.!lt to show two groups"of simti11laneous minerals in th~: circular diagram. The two diagrams, thus, complement each other.
In general, in the Shinarump No, 1 deposit uraninite is later than or simultaneous with most sulfides.• Chalcocite may be of two ages with some being later than uraninite. Rosen~~eig (Droullard and Jones), writing about the Seven Mile Canyon area, states: "It appears that the time of formation of the copper sulfides followed closely or possibly overlapped that of uraninite•." Thus, the paragenetic relationship of uraninite and sulfides in the Shinarump No. 1 deposit found by this study is not in complete agreement with the Seven Mile Canyon area taken as a unit.
Photomicrographs in figure 4 show some of the paragenetic relationships. Chalcocite cross-cutting uraninite that has completely replaced wood is shown in photomicrograph A. Photomicrographs C and D show the relationship of etched quartz grafus, uraninite, and chalcocite. Note the uraninite -free areas · surrounding the etched quartz grains. A peripheral line of uraninite is concentric with the shape of the etched quartz grain. Stringers of uraninite radiate from these peripheral lines. It appears that cracks may-· have formed in the chalcocite which were later filled with uraninite. Other, but less likely, explanations
are t~at these crack fillings represent the.replacement of cJrushed or distorted cellular structure of wood or
that chalcocite replaced quartz grains in places and thtt uraninite replaced the interstitial clay material.

CHALCOCITE

r
CHALCOCITE

------------Si.ultaneous deposition.

----.s:.:;..:...,L.!::;"J1..:1..&.:e";.:.&'=i.911:."1 t.:~.'--~•Simultaneous with replacing tendenc7 shown by arrows.

-----~•Replacement, example: chalcopyrite replacing bornite.

llote - Linea connect only thoee •inerals observed in contact. Minerals arranged clockwise in approximate order of deposition, Modified after Robertson and Vandeever (19~2)

{A)

Bornite

Chalcopyrite

Blue chalcocite ?

Pyrite
Ohaleocite

??

? -?--

UraniDite

(B)

lPipre 3. PARAGDltrSIS OP' tJR.AIINITE AID SULFIDE JIINERALS, SHIWJ.RUMP
HO• .1 IIDlE, OlWfD comrrr, U'l'AH

c. 152
E. X340

B. I95 D. X95
F. X20

A. Polished section ot sample No. 22 shoning replacement ot wood by uraninite (U, light gray) and chalcocite ( Cc, white).
About X8 magni!i·cation.
B. Polished section of sample No. 23 showing relation or
ch~cocite ( Cc, white) and uraninite {U, dark gray). About X95 magnification.
C & D. Polished section o! sanple No. 23 showing etched
quartz ("' dark gray) grains surrounded by chalcocite ( Cc, white) which ia tree or uraninite (U, light gray) and uraninite tilling minute cracks in chalcocite which a.re oriented radially about the quartz. About 152 and X95 magni!ication respectively.
I
E. Polished section o! sample No. 26 showing a texture interpreted c.a caused by exaolution of chalcopyrite ( Cp, white) in bornite (B, light gray), replacement of bornite by chalcocite
(Cc, dark gray), and uraninite (U, medium gray) cutting all other minerals. About 1340 magnification.
F. Thin section of sanple No. 5 with reflected and trans-
mitted light showing bleb o! minerals, pyrite (Py, light gray) surrounded by border of chalcocite and uraninite (Cc-u, black) in san~one. Note encroachment of quartz, (~, white) by ore minerals. About 120 magnification.

Figure 4. PHOTOJICRCDRAPHS OF POLISHED AND THIN SECTIONS FRW SHINAlUJMP NO. 1 MINE, GAAND COONTY, UTAH 19

53 J 2 )

17
Photomicrograph E shows a texture interpreted as caused by the exsolution of chalcopyrite in bornite. Photomicrograph F of a thin section of sample No. 5 shows the zoning of uraninite and chalcocite about a pyrite core.
Blue chalcocite, observed in one polished section, may be digenite which is a solid solution of covellite and chalcocite. Howev•~r. the common]igenite texture is absent. Wandke :( 1953) points out that if the specimen is heated above 68° C 1: during the preparation of the samplf!tdigenite may be formed from covellite and chalcocite. However, covellite was not observed, so that either all covellite was adjacent to chalcocite and transformed or digenite was present before preparation of :the sample. The author prepared the specimens in sealing wax which may not have heated the specimen above the critical temperature. The problem of blue chalcocite (digenite ?) is important from the standpoint of temperature of ore formation (Buerger 1941).
.~l?ETROLOO'Y
Samples of barren and uranium~bearing rock from the Shinarump No. 1 mine (table 1) were studied in thin section, slides of light and heavy grains, and by size analysis. In general, the ore ~ bearing rocks are siltstone and fine-grained sandstone that are more poorly sorted than the barren siltstone and fine-grained sandston~. Barren rocks include siltstone, fine- to coarse-grained sandstone, limestone~-pebble conglomerate, and mudstone. Rewor~ed Moenkopi siltstone and sandstone in the form of pebbles and grains are common in many beds. Visually, packing is good in both barren and ore-bearing rocks. Galcite and clayey material cements barren and ore-bearing rock. In general, the grains are subangular to well-rounded. Angular and broken feldspar is abundant in one uranium -bearing siltstone.
The composition of lightcom;tituents, specific gravity less than 2. 9, of the uranium - bearing and barren Chinle samples is mostly quartz and chert. Minor amounts of microcline, muscovite, orthoclase, and oligoclase are present. Some chert grains contain pyrite cubes. Heavy nonopaque detrital minerals, specific gravity greater than 2. 9; include mostly zircon, tourmaline, and biotite with minor amounts of rutile, chlorite, spinel, garnet, and staurolite. Opaque detrital mineral~ include ilmenite, leucoxene, and hematite. Authigenic barite is abundant in both barren and uranium-bearing rb'ck and has been

18

precipitated in open spaces, Counts of the heavy detrital minerals from barren and uranium-bearing

samples show no correlation of any mineral or group of minerals with uranium-bearing rock.

Table 1,--List of samples from Seven Mile Canyon area

Sample No.

Specific ~ocation _/

1 Wall MN

2 Wall MN

3 Wall MN 4 Wall GH

5 Wall MN

Uranium-bearing unbleached siltstone stringers
Uranium-bearing sandstone; very fine- to ~oarse-grained
Limy siltstone
Highly radioactive carbonaceous material
Uranium-bearing muddy siltstone

.6

Wall MN

Uranium-bearing silty

sandstone

7

Wall MN

Uranium-bearing siltstone

8

Wall CD

Uranium-bearing silty

sandstone

9

Wall CD

Uranium -bearing siltstone

10

1'1'
Wall EF

Muddy siltstone; forms back

of mine

11

Wall EF

Limestone pebble conglomerate

above ore

12

Wall MN

Uranium-bearing siltstone

13

Wall EF

Limy sandstone below ore

14

Wall EF

Barren siltstone

15

Wall CD

Uranium-bearing siltstone

north of fracture

16

Wall CD

Barren siltstone north of fracture

18 19
r f;i~ ure 9 unless other.wise noted.
: ..--·.-, -_. ·-~t·· ·s~::~~:~ ·~ - .;. ..(y;>~ -:-c_~ili~--- . . ~t~"f';.:J.;"#' ·,. ::·~.-,-··:~- ·;y "'?1}.·-·.-

Wall CD Wall CD Walll:J

Altered siltstone .:south of fracture Unaltered siltstone south of fracture Nonradioactive carbonaceous material

19

Table 1. --List of samples from Seven Mile Canyon area--Continued

Sample No.

Specific tocation_/

20
21 Copper prospect (fig. 2)
22 20 feet N. 3° W. of Station R (fig. 8)
23 28 feet N• .11° w. of
Station R (fig. 8) 24 Wall CD 25 Kellog No. 1 claim
(fig. 2)
26 Third stope from left (fig. 8)
27 North portal (fig. 8) 28 North portal (fig. 8) . 29- Wall IJ
30 Wall KL
31 Little Canyon (fig. 2)
_I Figure 9 unless otherwise noted

Secondary copper minerals in Moab fault zone
Copper-bearing material from Moab fault zone
Fractures filled with chalcocite
Uraninite and chalcocite layer
Conglomerate below ore
Uranium -bearing sandstone from the Morrison formation
Uraninite, bornite, chalcocite in seam
Barren Chinle siltstone Barren Shinarump sandstone
Uranium -bearing siltstone, chalcocite veins
Uranium-bearing siltstone and sandstone
Shinarump conglomeratic sandstone

X-ray ~spectrometric determinations 6f material smaller than 4 microns, from barren and ore -bearing samples made by the Trace Elements Laboratory of the Geochemistry and Petrology Branch of the Geological Survey, indicate the presence of quartz (fine cryptocrystalline ?), hydronlica, and kaolin in every sample. Small amounts of feldspar, calcite, dolomite, chlorite, and montmorillonite are present in some samples.

20
Results of size analysis are shown in figures 5, 6, and 7. Sample No, 31 (figs. 5C and 6C) is from the Shinarump conglomerate in Little Canyon (fig. 2). Sample No. 28 (figs. 5C and 6C) is taken near the mine from a lens of Similar sandstone which has been eroded and cut out by the overlying ore -bearing siltstone of the Chinle. The frequency and cumulative curves of the two samples are similar. .The suite of heavy minerals from the two samples is identical but different than the $Uitle:·Jfrom the Chinle samples. It is concluded that the lens near the mine is an erosional remnant of Shinarump near the margin of Shinarump deposition. The coarse grains in severM :~~ple$;~ cause bimodal frequency curves (fig. 6A, samples 7 and 8, fig. 6C, sample 24). This suggests a source for the coarse grains similar to the Shinarump or suggests that the coarse grains came from the Shinarump that was, in part, eroded before the deposition of the Chinle. Uranium -bearing samples are more poorly sorted than barren samples.
A special study was made on a single siltstone bed along wall C =D (fig. 9). The purpose of this study was to find what changes might be present in a bed which has been mineralized and bleached. A fracture between the uranium-bearing rock and the unaltered rock is parallel to the truncated ore as well as the line between bleached rand unbleached rock. The possible effect of this fracture on mineralization was also studied: The results of the size analysis of 4 samples are given in figure 7. The frequency curves arid thin section study show the siltstone to be poorer sorted to the north, on the mineralized side" of the fracture1 than to the south. Study of the light and heavy detrital minerals shows no correlation of any mineral or group of minerals with the uranium-bearing part of the siltstone. Howevel', :Bpectrographic analysis pf these samples indicates a marked increase of some elements in uranium -bearing rock over barren rock but no difference between bleached and unbleached rock. The increase of some elements in uranium-bearing rock is not reflected as a halo about the uranium-bearing rock. The position of the fracture with relation to uranium-bearing and bleached ro.ckis probably a coincidence as the spatial relationship of this fracture along strike shows no similar relationship to uranium-bearing or barren rock.
The results of the petrographic study show the uranium-bearing rock to be more poorly sorted than barren rock. Detrital grains in the uranium-bearing and barren rock are essentially the same in mineralogy and quantity. The mineralogy of the coarse fractions of the ore-bearing beds indicate original source rocks to be schists and acid to intermediate igneous rocks. The ore-bearing beds are thought to be mostly seconqcycle and, in some part, third-cycle sediments.

21.

100 ,-.,~~~;f::~:::_·" ·~---~-·-
So

~ 60
'\)
IJ
~
v
Q.. 40

_,/ .I.,·,.,.., ....~
i ... / .·

20

0_,
100
80
60
i-. (:
"..~....'
Q.. 40
20

0 2.. 3
A. Ore - h€>"-rinij Chinle
.
13 ';..

56 ~ Sc.o..le

78

9 . 10 II 12.

Stunp/es

--- ------ -·····

.............. .. .. ........... -· - - -

_J------r-----__ -·~_,.- ·:_:.

/\.~,-,/

_,. .

j 'i . .

0 - --: .:-:f:-.~ .--:- .-::7- · ·."' -:- - -

_, 0

I

B . Ba.,.,.en Chinle

56
~ Sccde samples

7 8 9 10 II 12

8o

..... 6AJ

c:

~......,

~
0...

40

J j
-~ :''
,...,·-·

20 /~··· - 28
. -<:::~;>/
0
-I 0
C. B-.,.ren

--~v
2 34 ~6
¢ Sc.o.le
Chinle (Nos . 14 (l.nd Z.4) and

78

10 II 12-

Sh ina..rtanf' ( l'los. 28 o.nd 3 1 ) Sa.t7>ples

Figure ~- CUWLATIVE CURVES OF SAMPlES FROM THE SEVEll MILE CANYON AREA, CJRAJID COmrrY, tJTAH

22

20
16

/;J
~ (:
Ill
\,)
....
. \ ~-n:--(·2.q; (;.
Q_
4

0 -I ()

2 34 5 6 1 ¢ S ca..le

A. Ore-bea.,...:ns Chinle so.t-nples

9 'O

2or-----r-----.-----,-----,-----,-----,-----~----- ,-----,-----.----~
.-.
,J(~/6 r-----+-----,_----~~: ---+----~----~~I----4-----~-----+----~----~

I\

B. 8o..,-,-en

Chi,.,/~

Ill Sco../e So.n->ples

zor----,~---,-----.-----.----~-----.-----.-----.-----.-----.----~

'6r-----t-----~-----r-----+----~~----+-----4-----~-----+----~----~

~ 12r-----t-----~2-87-:/~.., -'~-----+----~--~~A~\~----4-----~-----+----~----~

1 ·' \·. ,, J \C. I 8 r-----t-----i"4·f_;_...._·._·._..·~--··~~--3-'7f----~--·4-~+-~~~~-+-----4~----+-----4-----~

:t \ j \

/1( •. I

~r-----~~-~~-~,·,~----~--~~----~~--~~--· ,_·,~-~------~----+-----~----~

... <.···24y-" _.,>..< '·,

..\ /24')i

'· ~- ....

ok2·-·--~~~-------3-1~--·.-...-. ~~~~_·__-_._-·Jr--_·~:-~~--~-..~./~1-~--~/.~:·~·--~----~~-=---:-:L:-:-:------L-·--.--_· -L-----~

·I 0 I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

10

¢ Sco..le

C. 8o..~ren . Chinle (N os 14 o..nd Z.4) and Shina.,...u,..,p (Nos. 2.8 a.,.,d it)

So..rnples

Figure 6. FRFJJUENCY CURVES OF SAMPLES FIDJI THE SEVEN IIILE
CAWYOH AREA, GRAND COURTY, UTAH

23

100
8o
"\... 60 ~ Q/ <.) 4. <II
Q.. 40
2.0
0_,

0

20 16

i-.. I~

c:

()I
..'J

cu Q.._

8

4

0 -I

0

."
.-; . :.~·"'"·"<":'"·1~7~) ~~·~-~---·- - ·~

ll
.v ./~'

5 ~ Sca../e

78

9 10 II IZ

I \-11

2 ¢ 5 ca-/e

IO

N...,.~

S a..rnpl~ Nos.

Figure 7. CUJroLATIVB AND FREQUENCY CURVES OF ORE-BEARING AND
BARREN SILTS!'OD FROJl SHINARUMP NO. 1 VINE, ORAND I COUNTY, MAR. (SKETCH AFTF.R WALL MAP C-D)

24
HABITS OF ORE BODIES
The Shinarump No. 1 mine was mapped in plan on a scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet (fig. 8) and maps of walls and faces were made on a scale of 1 inch equals 5 feet (fig. 9). Sample locations are shown: in figures 2 and 8. Uranium minerals are not generally visible, so a Geiger counter was used to outline the extent of uranium-bearing rock. Arbitrary cutoffs in counts-per-minute were used to appraise the uranium values of the mine as stated in figure 8.
The uranium-bearing rock is almost a continuous lentic~lar layer that, in general, follows the bedding but locally and in small detail cuts across the bedding. Ore-gnade material is in discontinuous lenses which tend to be elongate about north-south. The ore averages 1 or 2 feet thick with a maximum thickness of about 5 feet. The grade of the ore ranges from 0. 10 percent to 1. 00 percent t1J36l8 with small
masses greater than 1. 00 percent u3o8• Near the edges of the deposit, the ore layer tends to rise in the
beds so that the deposit in cross-section is saucer shaped (wall maps AB, CD, fig. 9). The north edge of the deposit has an east-west trend. The ore-bearing beds are essentially flat lying and fill irregularities of ant erosional surface. Structural contours on the top of the Moenkopi indicate that no channel scour is present in the vicinity of the mine.
Most of the deposit is composed of siltstone and fine-grained sandstone impregnated with microscopic grains of uraninite, chalcocite, and pyrite. High-grade layers as much as half an inch in thickness of chalcocite and uraninite are found along some bedding planes. In one case, the high grade ore is concentrated along the base of a bed that overlies a less permeable appearing bed (fig. 9, wall map IJ). Vertical veinlets of chalcocite lead upward to this concentratipn.
The original color of sediments that contain the deposit is thought to have been red and altered later by solutions which may have deposited the ore. The only apparent change brought about by the alteration was a bleaching of red to gray and green. The bleaching extends 1 to 15 feet beyond the limits of the mineralized rock. Locally the limit of bleaching parallels the shape of 1tbe mineralized layers in detail.
Prospecting guides to additional ~ deposits similar to the Shinarump No. 1 in the Seven Mile Canyon area are (1) presence of bleached siltstone; (2) presence of copper sulfides, especially chalcocite;

25
(3) presence of carbonaceous matter ; and (4) thinning of the limestone-pebble conglomerate " marker bed" . The last ore guide is probably -only of local importance,
SPECTROGRAPHIC STUDY
Semiquantitative spectrographic analysis of 20 samples were analyzed :statistically 11. The geometric
11 Reported assays of semiquantitative spectrographic analysis were made by the Denver Trace Elements
Laboratory of the Geochemistry and Petrology Branch of the Geological Survey. The assays that are normally expressed in groups of powers of 10 were reported in subgroups whose theoretical range is shown in Appendix B. The geometric mean was obtained by applying a simple formula, which may be found in any elementary text on statistics, such as Waugh (1943), to the midpoints of the subgroups (class marks).
mean values in percent of 32 elements contained in groups of samples from barren and uranium -bearing rock from the Shinarump No. 1 mine, copper-bearing rock from nearby copper prospects in the Moab fault, and uranium-bearing rock from the Kellog No. 1 mine (fig. 2) in the Morrison formation are shown in table 2. Twenty-six other elements were tested for hut were not detected. In all groups of samples, common rock forming elements show no systematic variation. Comparison of barren and uranium -bearing rock from the Shinarump No. 1 mine shows a substantial increase in the uraniumbearing rock of the elements boron, beryllium, cobalt, copper, gallium, molybdenum, nickel, lead, silver, uranium, vanadium, yttrium, and zinc. In the uranium-bearing samples of the Shinarump No. 1 mine, mean values for barium, copper, vanadium, and titanium are as high as the grade of much of the uranium ore produced from the mine. Although based on few samples, the copper deposits show affinities to the barren rock at the Shinarump No. 1 mine except for the element silver. The values from a single sample from the Kellog No. 1 mine in the Morrison formation show similarities to the uranium-bearing rock from the Shinarump No. 1 mine.
Selenium content cannot be determined by spectrographic methods but it is suspected to be present in considerable quantity near the uranium and copper mines and along the Moab fault because selenium and sulfur indicator or tolerant plants are present in these areas.
' l' ' j_ ' )i ··
,· '

Tabl~.; 2:~.;~Geometric mean values (in percent) of elements contained in barren and u~anium-bearing
rock from the Shinarump No. 1 mine, copper-bearing rock from nearby copper deposits, and uranium-bearing rock from a nearby deposit in the Morrison formation.

Element

Geometric mean in percent calculated from spectrographic analysis

Chinle
barren
rock 11

Chinle uranium-bearing
rock!/

Copperbearing rock 2_/

Morrison uranium -bearing
rock1/

Si 30 30

'Al 2 4

'K 1 2

Na 0.1 0.3

Fe 1 2

Mn

0.03

0.02

Ca 5 2

Mg 0.6 1

Ba 0.07 0.2

Sr 0.02 0.03

Ti 0.2 0.2

Zr 0.02 0.04

Cr

0.006

0.01

Ga

0.0004

0.002

Sc

0.002

0.002

La D2/ 0

Be

0.0001

0.001

B

0.01

0.05

y

0.002

0.01

Ce D2/ 0

Nd D2/ 0

v

0.02

0.2

Ni

0.0009

0.008

Co

0.0003

0.008

Cu

0.05

0.2

Pb

0.002

0.03

Zn 0 0.03

Cd 0 D~/ '

Mo D.Q/ 0.003

Sn 0 D_Q/

Ag D2/ 0.0007
u 0 1.00

30 2 0.4 0.07 0.5 0.03 2 0.2 0.1 0.007 0.06 0.02 0.002 0 0 0 0 0.005 0.001 0 0 0.03 0.002 0.002 5 0.003 0 0 0.001 0 0.002 0

30 0.3 0.3 0.06 2 0.03 '2 0.3 0•.02 0.02 0.2 0.02 0.02 0.0002 0 0 0 0,006 0.003 0 0 0.2 0.003 0.02 2 0.6 0.2 0.003 0.02 0 0.02 0.06

Looked for but not found: As, Au, Bi, Ce, Ge, In, lr, Hf, Hg, Li, Nb, Os, P, Pd, Pt, Re, Rh, Ru, Sb, Sm, Ta, Te, Th, Ti, Yb, and W.
i'i1 / Result of 10 .samples from Shinarump No. 1 mine. Result of 7 samples from Shinarump No. 1 mine. 2_/ . Result of 2 samples. 4/ Values of 1 sample. ~/ Detected (D) in too few samples to take geometric mean.

27
Chemical and radioactivity analysis of uranium shows the uranium ore to be nearly in equilibrium. This equilibrium and the general lack of secondary minerals indicate that the ore is rrelatively unoxidized and that ground water has had little effect upon the ore.
High radioactivity is found in some seams of carbonaceous material. Comparison of the spectrographic analysis of megascopically identical relatively nonradioactive with highly radioactive carbonaceous materia1s .(sample Nos. 19 and 4, respectively) shows the radioactive carbonaceous material to contain at least one order more of barium, zinc, cob~lt, nickel, uranium, and silver. This is similar to the differences in the mean metal values of barren and of uranium-bearing rock. However, in the radioactive carbonaceous material, the values of these elements are high; barium assays about 30 percent, zinc assays about 5 percent, and cobalt and nickel assay over 1 percent. The great inequilibrium of the radioactive carbonaceous material indicated by the comparison of 6. 6-.percent equivalent value for uranium and 0. 17 percent chemical value for uranium is due to radon. The relatively nonradioactive carbonac~ous material is nearly in equilibrium.
The results of the spectrographic analyses indicate that the solutions which deposited the copper in the Moab fault zone were probably different than those which deposited the uranium in the Chinle and Morrison formations. The uranium-b~aring :~~olrutions probably contained important amounts of barium, vanadium, uranium, and copper as well as lesser amounts of strontium, chromium, boron, yttrium, lead, and zinc. The abundance of sulfide minerals in the deposits indicate that the solutions were probably reducing in character and sulfur rich.
.I
The following is a resume of the results of "The lead-uranium age determinations of some uraninite specimens from Triassic and Jurassic sedimentary rocks of the Colorado Plateau" by Stieff and Stern (1953). As part of their study on the origin of uranium deposits in the Triassic and Jurassic sedimentary rocks of::J:he Colorado Plateau, 21 samples of uraninite from 13 deposits were collected for Pb206 /U238 age determinations. These uraninites are believed to be the most reliable of more than 100 samples from the Plateau on which age determinations have been made. The average age of the

28
uraninites from the Morrison is lower by a factor of two than the best estimate of the age for the Morrison formation. The average age of the uraninite samples, one from Shinarump No. 1 mine (fig. 8), from ·ihe ,Sti:ilnarump conglomerate is lower by a factor of three than the best estimate of the age of the Shinarump conglomerate. The average age of samples from the Upper Jurassic formation does not differ significantly from the average age of samples from the Lower Triassic Shinarump conglomerate. The average age of samples from the two formations is in very close agreement with the best available estimates for the age of the end of the Cretaceous or the heginningof the Tertiary.
Stieff and Stern conclude that: "Most of the lead-uranium data that we have obtained strongly suggests that the deposits are
not syngenetic but were emplaced in the sediments during the Tertiary, .long after the enclosing sediments were laid down. If, however, the deposits are syngenetic in origin, an event must have occurred at the end of the Cretaceous or during the Tertiary which completely redistributed the uranium and localized the ore in its present sites."
ORIGIN OF ·DEPOSIT
For many years the uranium deposits on the Colorado Plateau, which 'i;ncluded mostly oxidized vanadium-uranium ~ deposits (carnotite-type) ofthe Morrison and Shinarump formation~:¥- were considered to have been formed shortly after the deposition (penesyngenetically) of the enclosing sediments (Fischer, 1942). Due to concentrated investigations, however, during the past several years and the ~iseovery of relatively unoxidized uranium deposits of the vanadium-uranium, copper-uranium. and uranium-~ types in many different formations of the Colorado Plateau and adjoining regions, several hypotheses that had been discarded previously are being reconsidered. These include: . hydrothermal origin, downward leaching of uranium from volcanic strata, and petroliferous origin. -·.A q'ii'ef statement of the fundamentals of each of the hypotheses follows.
The penesyngenetic hypothesis may be best expressed by quoting Fischer. ''The primary ore minerals are thought to have been introduced into their present position
not long after the sands were deposited. If this is true, the metals were probably transported ~nd deposited by ground waters, and the :.<HleS were probably localized by delicate chemical and physical conditions that now cannot be definitely recognized. This hypothesis probably requires at least three separate periods of ore deposition, to account for the ore in the Shinarump, Entrada, and Morrison formations."

29
Since his studiesj deposits have been found in the Hermit, Cutler, Moenkopi, Chinle, Todilto, Dakota, Mesa Verde, Wasatch, Uili ta, and other formations on the Colorado Plateau.
The concept of a hydrothermal origin of the uranium deposits received impetus from the results of age determinations of uraninite specimens from uranium deposits of the Colorado Plateau (Stieff and Stern, 1953). The hydrothermal hypothesis suggests that uranium-bearing solutions were related to Tertiary igneous activity and that solutions moved vertically along fractures and then laterally until reaching favorable loci where the uranium was deposited.
Downward leaching of uranium from volcanic strata has been suggested because of the thick series of strata containing abundant volcanic debris thatoverlie both the Salt Wash member of the Morrison formation and the Shinarump conglomerate. Waters and Granger ( 1953) use the devitrification of this volcanic material to provide the silica for silicification of wood as well as for the addition of silica in the ore-bearing sandstones. Others (Proctor, 1949, and Love, 1952) have suggested these and other stra!a containing volcanic material as source rocks for the uranium.
Uranium -bearing anaterial and petroleum have the same suite of trace metals, and thus a common origin has been suggested (R. Erickson, oral communication).
Any hypothesis must account for all of the following relations or facts before it can be accepted
as a satisfactory explanation of the origin of nhe tdepo~rims in··r, .rr: r,t ' i:::~ ; j ~:t ~~-:.·t -.! ,
( 1) Sedimentary structures, such as channels and lenses, and sedimentary features such as bedding planes, graded bedding, and impervious barriers controlled the location of most of the ore -deposits.
(2) Bleaching of red mudstones to gray or green accompanies most deposits. (3) Most deposits are in continental-type sediments. (4) Most deposits are associated with carbonaceous material. (5) The common age indicated by age determinations. (6) The persistent association of uranium with vanadiumin the Morrison formation and the variety
of element associations inclu,ding vanadium and copper in the Triassic f~rmations. The origin of the Shinarump No. 1 deposit is thought to be hydrothermal. The Shinarump No. 1 deposit
is clearly later than enclosing sediments. Age determinations by Stieff and Stern indicate that the
uraninite in this deposit formed at the end of the Cretaceous or the beginning of the Tertiary. The mineral

30
assemblage, particularly the presence of uraninite, blue chalcocite (digenite ?), and bornite-chalcopyrite solid solution, strongly suggests a temperature of formation warmer than the temperature of normal ground water. The localization of the ore is related to the pinchout of the Shinarump· conglomerate on a regional .and local scale, and to sedimentary features such as bedding planes, graded bedding, and sorting, within ore-bearing beds. Carbonaceous and clayey material may have acted as a chemical and physical attraction for the localization of the ore. Ground water probably played an important role in the precipitation of the uranium and sulfides.
CONCLUSIONS
The Shinarump No. 1 deposit, which is located on the west flank of the Moab anticline, is in the lowermost Chinle siltstone beds that truncate erosional remnants of Shinarump conglomerateG Uranium deposits in the Seven Mile Canyon area and elsewhere to the south and west are near the margins of Shinarump deposition.
The ore is relatively unoxidized. Uraninite (pitchblende), a primary mineral, is the most abundant ore mineral. It occurs as small grains disseminated in sandstone and replacing wood structureG Uraninite, which is associated mainly with chalcocite and pyrite, is later than most sulfides except chalcocite which is, in part, later. Chalcocite occurs in vertica~ fractures that trend east. The ore minerals occur in more poorly sorted parts of siltstone and in stringers of coarse sand in siltstone.
The ore depo~it is not in a channel fill but in flat-bedded sediments that were deposited on an irregular surfaceG Guides to ore in the Seven Mile Canyon area inferred from the study of the Shinarump No. 1 deposit are the presence of bleached siltstone, copper. sulfides, and carbonaceous material. The deposit lies below thin parts of the limestone-pebble conglomerate "marker bed''o
The origin of the Shinarump No. 1 deposit is probably hydrothermalc. Mineralizing solutions--hydrothermal and, in part. ground water--are thought to have Qeen reducing in chara<;:ter and containing important arnounts of barium, vanadium, uranium, copper, and sulfur as well as lesser amounts of strontium. chromium, boron, yttrium, lead, and zinc.

31
Buerger, N. W., 1941, The chalcocite problem, Econ. Geology, v. 36, no. 10, p. 19-44.
Fischer, R. P., 1942, Vanadium deposits of Colorado and Utah: U. S. Geol. Survey Bull. 936-P.
Love, J. D., 1952, Preliminary report on uranium deposits in the Pumpkin Buttes area, Powder River Basin, Wyoming: U. S. Geol. Survey Circ. 176.
McKnight, E. T., 1940, Geology of area between Green and Colorado Rivers, Grand and San Juan Counties, Utah: U. S. Geol. Survey Bull. 908.
Robertson, F., and Vandeveer, P. L., 1952, A new diagrammatic scheme for paragenetic relations of the ore minerals: Econ. Geology, v. 47, no. 1, p. 101-105.
Sho<!maker, E. M., 1951, Internal structure of the Sinbad Valley-Fisher Valley salt anticline,. Colorado and Utah (Abstract): Geol. Soc. America Bull., v. 62, no. 12, part 2.
Stokes, W. L. and Phoenix, D. .A., 1948, Geology of the Egnar-Gypsum Valley area, San Miguel and Montrose Counties, Colorado: U. S. Geol. Survey Oil and Gas Inv., Prelim. Map 93.
Wandke, A. D. , 1953, Polishing phenomena in the copper sulfides!: Econ. Geology, v. 48, no. 3, p. 225-232.
Waters, A. C. , and Granger, H. C. , 1953, Volcanic debris in uraniferous~: sandstone and its possible bearing on the origin and precipitation of uranium: U. S. Geol. Survey Circ. 224.
Waugh, A. E., 1943, Elements of statistical method: McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., p. 99.
UNPUBLISHED REPORTS
Droullard 1 R. F., 1951, Prospective bulldozer operations in the Seven Mile area: U. S. Atomic Energy Commission RMO 689.
Droullard, R. F., and Jones, E. E~, 1952, Geology of the Seven Mile Canyon uranium deposits,
Grand County, Utah: U. s. Atomic Energy Commission RMO 815.
Proctor, P. D., 1949, Geology of the Harrisburg (Silver Reef) mining district, Washington County, Utah: Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana University.
Stieff, L. R., and Stern, T. W., 1953, The lead-uranium ages of some uraninite specimens from Triassic and Jurassic sedimentary rocks of the Colorado Plateaus: U. S. Geol. Survey Trace Elements Inv. Rept. 322.
Weeks, A. D., 1952, Summary report on mineralogic studies of the Colorado Plateau through April 30, 1952: U. S. Geol. Survey Trace Elements Memo. Rept. 431.

32
APPENDIX A Stratigraphic section UTAH - GRAND COUNTY
SHINARUMP NO. 1 CLAIM section, measured about 1, 500 feet south of Corral Canyon. Line of section
s. 65 w., sec. 27, T. 24 s., R. 20 E., Salt Lake meridian.
(Measured by W. I. Finch, December 1952)

Wingate sandstone (incomplete):

Feet

30, Top of section; not top of exposure

29. Sandstone, yellowish gray (5Y8/1) _/, weathers pale red (10R6/2), fine- to very

fine-grained, bedding not distinct. Only basal 5 ft. examined; estimated

height of cliff face 220 ft. Unit not measured • • • • • • • • • • • •

28. Contact: Chinle formation and Wingate sandstone contact placed at sharp change

from cliff-forming sandstone of Wingate to slope-forming shale and sandstone of

Chinle. Mudcracks at base of Wingate; light green alteration of upper few

inches of Chinle and of mudcrack fillings.

27, Unconformity (local ?).

Chinle formation:

26, Shale and interbedded sandstone and conglomerate, pale red (10R6/2), sandstone

fine-grained; conglomerate contains mostly clastic limestone concretions.

Sandstone and conglomerate beds mostly 1 ft. or 1 ss in thickness. For most

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .part unit forms steep covered slope • • • • • •

.. .

73

25. Sandstone, light red (5R6/6), fine-grained; quartziti ; thin horizontal bedding

with some low-angle cross-bedding: forms ledge; channels into lower unit • • • • • •

7

24. Sandstone and mudstone. moderate red (5R5/4), fine-grained, irregular bedding,

. . . . . . . . . . . .. .forms ledge • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

..

.

12

_/ Rock-color chart prepared by "The Rock-Color Chart ommittee," E. N. Goddard and others,
National ResearGh Council, Washington, D. c., 1948

33

Feet

23, Sat1dstone ,and conglomerate, pale red (5R6/2) and lig t-greenish gray (5GY8/l),

fine-grained, Conglomerate consists mainly of cla tic limestone concretions.

Abundant hematitic concretions scattered mainly in sandstone beds, some

silicified wood, some white calcite filling cavities nd fractures. Irregular

bedding and penecontemporaneous slumping. This nd upper two units form

a single ledge which divides the Chinle into two m mbers. Base of unit channels

in lower beds and is base of upper member of Chinl formation . . • . . . • • . . . ·. 16

22. Sandstone, pale red (5R6/2) with interbeds of yellowis gray (5Y7/2), fine-

grained, thin-bedded, beds weather with hackly sur ace. Forms a steep

covered slope , . • . . • .. • • • .• . . • • .• •

64

21. Conglomerate, yellowish gray (5Y7 /2), clastic limest ne concretions and some

white quartz, pebbles range from one-fourth inch to 2 inches across, calcareous

cement. Irregular bedding, forms ledge , . • • • .. . • • • . • • . ·· . . .

6

20. Sandstone and siltstone, moderate red orange (10R6/6) sandstone, fine-grained,

in beds mainly 1 ft. thick which form discontinuous channel-fillings; small

scale cross-bedding; some miniature slumping; unit orms slope

19. Sandstone, grayish green (5GY6/1), fine-grained; eom osed of quartz grains l!!

white mica, some carbon flecks; calcareous cement, thin-bedded; weathers

into small irregular crescent-shaped partings; forms lope; lenticular, channels

. . . . . ... . ..into lower unit . . . • • . . • . . . . • . • .

·•

·•

.

"

4

18. Siltstone, dark red brown ( 10R3/4), 'some white mica

grains, thin-bedded forms slope. Uranium-bearing __1~p,la,:c~s
· ' ."1·,.
17. Cliystone and siltstone, light green (5G7 /4) and light

22

some fine quartz grains, whit~ and green mica, wo d fragments; thin-bedded;.
~" ·~.

forms slope, grades into overlying beds. Uranium-

in places, some

\ wood rep' laced by uraninite and becquerelite

22

Feet

16. Conglomerate, greenish gray (5GY6/1), clastic lime pebbles up to 2 in,

across, some quartz grains, some limonitic stains, calcareous cement, uneven

bedding, forms ledge. Uranium-bearing in upper part, uraninite forms rims

about some limestone pebbles • . . . •

13

15. Mudstone, pale red (10R6/2), some limestone pellets . • • •• • • • • ·• • • • • ·• 0 • • • 2

14. Conglomerate, pale green (5G7 /2), clastic limestone pebbles, calcareous

,cement, irregular bedding • • · • . . • . . . . . . • • . . . . . . .
i
13. Siltstone and conglomerate , moderate reddish orange (10R6/6), conglomerate

1

contains clastic limestone pebbles and reworked Moenkopi siltstone pebbles;

abundant limonite staining; some white quartz grains, irregular bedding, forms

steep slope beneath conglomerate ledge. Uranium-bearing at Shinarump No. 1 mine

7

Total Chinle formation

297

Shinarump conglomerate: -

12. Absent in line of section

11. Unconformity (erosional).

Moenkopi formation:

10. Shale and mudstone, pale green (5G7 /2) and moderate red (5R5/4), mica along

bedding, bedding poorly developed .. • . • .

1

9. Shale, grayish brown (5YR3/2), some white mica, bedding poorly developed

6

8. Sandstone, moderate red (5R5/4) grading upward into grayish green (10GY5/2),
coarse-grained, massive . • .• • . . • . . . .• • . • . . . • . • •
lit.
7. Sandstone, very pale orange ( 10YR8/2) to moderate reddish brown (10R4/6), fine-

·.
2

grained, grading to coarse-grained near top, angular quartz grains, abundant

muscovite and biotite, thick-bedded, forms rounded slope, some bleaching

along and across bedding

11

Total Moenkopi formation

20

35

• • .-.

r

6. Unconformity(?) . .

· Cutler formation:

5. Sandstone and shale, moderate red brown ( 10R4/6), some biotite along bedding,

irregular bedding, forms bench .. . . • • • .

4. ·Sandstone, moderate reddish brown (10R4/6), .medium - to coarse-grained,

some mica, very thickly cross-bedded, irregular bleaching along .some ·beds,,

weathers rounded, forms ledge . • • . . • • . • . . . • • . • •

3. Shale, pale red (lOR6/2), contains mud crack fillings, bleached in places

2. Sandstone, grayish red purple (5RP4/2) to moderate red (5R4/6), coarse-grained

to conglomeratic, some white mica and feldspar, abundant biotite, thin-

bedded to low angle cross-lamination, bleached spheres from one-fourth inch

. . . . .to 1. 5 ft. in diameter cutting bedding; friable; forms ledge •

-· .

1. Base of outcrop, not base of formation.

Total Cutler formation exposed . . . . . . • . . . . . • . . , . . • . • . . . • . . . • . • , • . • , . . ~·

! ,· ~

l

: ~- .

I ~'

Feet
.31 24
1
10 66

APPENDIX B Group number classification

Assay rpt. (o/o)
XX. +
xx.. xx.-
X. +
x.
x. -
.X+
.X
.X-
.ox+ .,..ox ..ox .... ..oox + .oox .oox. ooox + .ooox . ooox -

Group No.*
1+ 1 12+ 2
23+
3 34+ 4 45+ 5 56+ 6 6-

Class range

46.4

100,0

21.5
10. o

46,3
21~A

4.6 9.9

2.2 4,5

1. 0 2.1

0.46

0,9

0,22

0,45

0,10 o. 21

o. 046 - o. 09

0.022

0.045

o. 010 - o. 021

o. 0046 - o. 009

0·•. 0022 .,..,. o. 0045

0.001

0.0021

o. 00046- o. 0009

o. 00022 - 0.. 00046

o. 0001 - o. 00021

Class mark 68.1 31.6 14.7 6.8 3.2 1. 5 0.68
o. 32
0,15 0.068 0,032 0.015 0,0068 0.0032 0,0015 0.00068 0,00032 0,00015

*Subgroups overlap somewhat, but about 80 percent of cases will be in correct subgroup.

