UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

537

PRELIMINARY GEOLOGIC MAP OF THE EASTERN SOLOMON AND SOUTHEASTERN BENDELEBEN QUADRANGLES, EASTERN SEWARD PENINSULA, ALASKA By
T. P. Miller, D. G. Grybeck, R. L. Elliott, and Travis Hudson

Open-file report 1972

This report is preliminary and has not been edited or reviewed for conformity with Geological Survey standards

EXPLANATION
Introduction
Parts of the area encompassed by the eastern Solomon and southeastern Bendeleben quadrangles were mapped in broad reconnaissance fashion by Mendenhall (1901) and Smith and Eakin (1911). The purpose of this report is to present the results of more recent mapping done at various times from 1968 to 1971. Additional mapping by Hopkins (1963) has been incorporated in the extreme northwestern part of the area as has data from Herreid (1965) near Omilak. Discussion of the economic geology will follow in a later report.
METAMORPHIC AND SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
p mc
Metamorphic complex
Chiefly high-grade pelitic schist and gneiss with intercalated marble, calc-silicate gneiss and minor amphibolite. Pelitic schist and gneiss composed chiefly of quartz+plagioclase+biotite-Hnuscovite+almandine+ sillimanite+staurolite+K-feldspar+clinopyroxene+hornblende; cordierite and andalusite were found only near Omilak Mountain and north of Portage Roadhouse. Large outcrop areas of marble mapped separately as p m. Calcsilicate gneiss is medium grained and composed of calcite+quartz4diopside+ garnet+scapolite+plagioclase.
Unit is intruded by quartz monzonite (Kqm) stocks and dikes of aplite, graphic granite, and alaskite as well as the Darby and Bendeleben plutons; pegmatite dikes are common in Bendeleben Mountains but not in Darby Mountains .
Metamorphic complex is assigned a Precambrian age based on correlation with similar rocks in the Kigluaik Mountains which have yielded Precambrian Rb/Sr ages (Sainsbury and others, 1970). May include rocks that are stratigraphically equivalent to parts, or all, of rocks mapped as quartzmica schist (p qms) and graphitic schist (p gs).
Phase assemblages indicate most of this unit belongs to the middle and upper almandine amphibolite facies of regional metamorphism.
pm
Marble
Chiefly white, medium to coarsely crystalline and composed of calcite+ diopside+foresterite+phlogopite. Only larger marble areas mapped separately from p mc.
Tentatively assigned a Precambrian age based on interbedded relationships with pelitic schist and calc-silicate gneiss of p mc but may include rocks as young as mid-Paleozoic.

mi
Migmatitle zone
Lithologically similar to p mc but with granitic dikes, stocks, and bosses of probable Cretaceous age too abundant and intimately associated with metamorphic rocks to map separately.
Cut by lamprophyre dike swarm (not shown on map) near Cape Darby.
p qms
Quartz-mica schist, metavolcanic rocks
Chiefly quartz-mica schist with lesser amounts of metavolcanic rocks (greenschist), graphitic schist, and marble. Quartz-mica schist is composed chiefly of quartz+chlorite-fmuscovite+albiteHhchloritoid+garnetHh calcite and has a well-developed lineation and foliation. Metavolcanic rocks are chiefly greenschist composed chiefly of albite+actinolite+ chlorite+epidote+quartz+calcite+garnet. Graphitic schist is black, sooty, fine-grained siliceous rock composed chiefly of quartz-fmuscovite+graphite. Marble ranges from massive and crystalline to schistose. Phase assemblages indicate greenschist facies of regional metamorphism, in particular the quartz+albite-fmuscovite+chlorite subfacies (Winkler, 1967). Near Kiwalik Mountain, however, presence of biotite, and locally, kyanite and staurolite, indicate a higher grade metamorphism, probably in the lower almandine amphibolite facies.
Tentatively assigned a Frecambrian age based on correlation with similar rocks in the western Solomon quadrangle which have been assigned by Sainsbury and others (1972) to the Casapedega schist and "York Slate" of Frecambrian age.
p gs
Graphitic schist, metasiltstone
Chiefly gray-black, quartz-muscovite-graphite schist with minor schistose marble; in northern Darby Mountains chiefly gray-black metasiltstone, marble, and gray-green calcareous metagraywacke.
Tentatively assigned a PreCambrian age based on correlation with similar rocks assigned to the "York Slate" in the western Solomon quadrangle (Sainsbury and others, 1972).

p sm
Schistose marble
Thin-bedded, schistose marble with minor graphitic, chloritic, and calc-schists. Weathers to characteristic buff to orange colored soil. Composed chiefly of calcite+albite-hnuscovite. Well-developed lineation and foliation.
Tentatively assigned a Precambrian age based on correlation with lithologically similar rocks in the western Solomon quadrangle (Sainsbury and others, 1972).
Did
Limestone and dolomite
Chiefly white, massive, crystalline limestone with fetid odor; weathers to form barren gray-colored hills. Interbedded with dark gray to black, thin-bedded dolomite and dolomitic limestone; locally brecciated and fossiliferous. East of Darby Mountains, unit contains some dark gray phyllite and thin fault slices of schistose marble (not mapped separately) which may be correlative with p sm. Intruded by numerous altered diabase dikes and plugs east of Darby Mountains.
Assigned a Devonian age based on fossil collections containing Amphipora, Thamnopora, Syringopora, and Cladopora (W. A. Oliver, 1971, written communication).
Kc
Conglomerate
Poorly sorted, thick-bedded cobble- and boulder conglomerate; clasts chiefly limestone with subordinate greenstone (Pmv) and schist. Minor interbeds of graywacke and thin coal seams.
Assigned a Cretaceous age based on correlation with similar rocks in the Candle quadrangle (Patton, 1967).
mis
Marble, limestone, and schist
Undifferentiated schistose marble and schist of probable Precambrian age (p sm) and limestone of probable Devonian age (Did). Mapped only in extreme northern part of map area and very poorly exposed with a widespread forest and tundra cover. Scattered exposures of different rock types of different age suggest a faulted and structurally complex area.

VOLCANIC ROCKS
Pnrv
Mafic volcanic rocks srp - serpentinite
Strongly sheared altered mafic volcanic and hypabyssal rocks composed chiefly of chlorite4«pidote4albite+actinolite+glaucophane+pumpellyite+ pyrite+relic augite. Forms a more-or-less continuous outcrop belt along eastern edge of map area and dikes and.small plugs intruding Did and p sm throughout map area. A small serpentinite body (srp) occurs associated with sheared diabase between Kwiniuk River and Clear Creek in the eastern Solomon quadrangle and locally in fault slivers near El1m.
Tentatively assigned a Permian age based on lithologic correlation with similar rocks on St. Lawrence Island and on the south flank of the Brooks Range (Patton, 1971).
Q1J Lost Jim flow Qg Gosling volcanics QTi Imuruk volcanics QTb Undifferentiated basalt
Chiefly tholeiitic and alkali olivine basalt with lesser amounts of nephelinitic basalt; some intercalated gravel. Relatively flat-lying but with local dips as much as 40°. Queried where completely concealed by overburden and presence is suggested only by aeromagnetic. surveys (State of Alaska, Div. of Geological Survey, Aeromagnetic Survey, Bendeleben A-l, A-2, and B-l).
Areas mapped as Lost Jim flow, Gosling volcanics, and Imuruk volcanics in extreme northwest part of map are taken from Hopkins (1963). Imuruk volcanics in Koyuk River valley may include some Gosling volcanics. Most areas mapped as QTb have a near-complete cover of silt and tundra.
The Imuruk volcanics are considered by Hopkins and others (1971) to range in age from Late Tertiary to Middle Pleistocene and the overlying Gosling volcanics and Lost Jim flow to be Quaternary in age (Hopkins, 1963).

INTRUSIVE ROCKS
Kmgn
Granite gneiss of Kiwalik Mountain pluton
Fine-grained biotite-muscovite granite gneiss with well-developed foliation. Has sharp contacts with surrounding quartz-mica schist unit (p qms) and may be intrusive into it. Absolute age unknown but welldeveloped metamorphic fabric suggests an age older than nearby unmetamorphosed Cretaceous plutons.
Kkms
Monzonite and syenite of Kachauik pluton
Leucocratic to mesocratic, porphyritic and trachytoid, coarse-grained monzonite and syenite. Cut by aplite, quartz latite porphyry (Kql), lamprophyre, and alkaline dikes (Kad). Tentatively assigned a midCretaceous (Albian-Cenomanian) age based on a K-Ar age of 97.5+3 m.y. (M. A. Lanphere, written communication).
Kkhd
Hybrid diorite of Kachauik pluton
Chiefly mesocratic to melanocratic, coarse-grained hybrid diorite characterized by abundant biotite. May be a border phase of the monzonite and syenite of Kachauik pluton (Kkms).
Kkgm
Gneissic monzonite of Kachauik pluton
Leucocratic to mesocratic, medium-grained, gneissic to trachytoid monzonite. Cut by alkaline dikes (Kad). May be a border phase of monzonite and syenite of Kachauik pluton (Kkms).
Kdns
Nepheline syenite of Dry Canyon pluton
Leucocratic, porphyritic to trachytoid, medium-grained nepheline syenite (foyaite). Cut by blue-gray pulaskite dikes. Tentatively assigned a mid-Cretaceous age based on K-Ar age of 105+3 m.y. (M. A. Lanphere, written communication). Includes some monzonite and syenite similar to that in Kachauik pluton.

Kwcm
Monzonite and quartz monzonite of Windy Creek pluton
Leucocratic, massive, locally porphyritic to trachytoid, medium-grained monzonite and quartz monzonite; includes some nepheline syenite. Commonly fractured and hydrothermally altered (Miller and others, 1971). Tentatively assigned a mid-Cretaceous age based on lithologic similarity to dated rocks elsewhere on eastern Seward Peninsula (Miller, 1972).
Kdqm
Quartz monzonite of Darby pluton
Leucocratic, massive, coarse-grained quartz monzonite. Cut by aplite and lamprophyre dikes. Tentatively assigned a Late Cretaceous age based on K-Ar ages of 81.4+3 m.y. and 92.1+2.8 m.y. (M. A. Lanphere, written commun. » 1969; 1970).
Kkg
Granodiorite of Kachauik pluton
Leucocratic, massive to porphyritic, medium-grained granodiorite and quartz monzonite. Cut by aplite, quartz latite porphyry, alkaline, and lamprophyre dikes. Tentatively assigned a Late Cretaceous age based on K-Ar age of 86.1+3 m.y. (M. A. Lanphere, written commun. , 1970).
Kql
Quartz latite porphyry
Leucocratic, porphyritic, medium-grained quartz latite porphyry, Correlated with granodiorite of Kachauik pluton on basis of lithology and proximity and therefore assumed to be Late Cretaceous in age. More dikes are present than are shown on the map.
Kbqra
Quartz monzonite of Bendeleben pluton
Leucocratic, fine- to medium-grained quartz monzonite and granodiorite. Cut by aplite and alasklte dikes. Assigned a Late Cretaceous age based on a K-Ar age of 79.8+2.4 m.y. (M. A. Lanphere, written commun. , 1969).

Kklq
Quartz nonzonlte of Kuzitrin Lake pluton
Leucocratic to mesocratic, medium- to coarse-grained, generally porphyritic quartz monzonite and granodiorite. Numerous inclusions and signs of contamination along the southern margin of the pluton. Tentatively assigned a Late Cretaceous age.
Kad
Alkaline dikes
Pulaskite, foyaite, and pseudoleucite porphyry dikes Intrusive into granodiorite (Kkg) and nonzonite and syenite (Kkms) of Kachauik pluton. Forms large dike swarm in the Kachauik pluton only a few of which are shown on the nap. Absolute age unknown but assumed to be Late Cretaceous.
Kqm
Quartz monzonite
Leucocratic, fine-grained quartz monzonite intrusive into metamorphic complex (p mc) and migmatitle zone (mi); only larger bodies shown. Assumed to be Cretaceous in age.
Khi
Hypabyssal intrusive rocks
Chiefly quartz latite, latite, and quartz porphyry with numerous screens of metamorphic rocks. Considerable hydrothermal alteration. Assumed to be Cretaceous in age.
Ksd
Diorite of Spruce Creek pluton
Poorly exposed, altered, fine- to medium-grained diorite(7). Assumed to be Cretaceous in age*

UNCONSOLIDATED SEDIMENTARY DEPOSITS (Mapped chiefly from aerial reconnaissance and photos)
Qm Morainal deposits Chiefly gravel and sand with well-developed morainal topography; only larger areas shown. Prominent lateral and terminal moraines shown by hachured line. Probably correlative with Nome River (Illinoian) and Salmon Lake (Wisconsin) glacial stages of Hopkins (1963).
Qo Outwash deposits Chiefly gravel, sand, and silt deposits; includes some flood-plain deposits. Topography characterized by numerous small lakes, ponds, and marshes.
Qca Colluvium and alluvium Chiefly colluvial and alluvial deposits of gravel, sand, talus, and silt, including windblown silt but includes some flood-plain and morainal deposits. Thick cover of tundra and forest.
Qs Sand deposits Chiefly windblown sand deposits south of Fish River delta.
Qfty Qfto Flood-plain and tidal flat deposits Chiefly silt and fine sand deposits. Gravel in small streams draining upland areas. Topography of old deposits (Qfto) characterized by development of abundant small thaw lakes and ponds. Topography of young deposits (Qfty) characterized by bars, ox-bow lakes, meander scrolls, abandoned channels, and braided distributary streams.
8

Qf
Flood-plain deposits
Chiefly fine sand and silt. Topography characterized by bars, ox-bow lakes, meander scrolls, and abandoned channels.

REFERENCES CITED Herreid, Gordon, 1965, Geology of the Omilak-Otter Creek area, Bendeleben
quadrangle, Seward Peninsula, Alaska: Alaska Div. Mines and Minerals, Geol. Rept. no. 11, 12 p. Hopkins, D. M., 1963, Geology of the Imuruk Lake area, Seward Peninsula, Alaska: U.S. Geol. Survey Bull. 1141-C, 101 p. Hopkins, D. M., Matthews, J. V., Wolfe, J. A., and Silberman, M. L., 1971, A Pliocene flora and insect fauna from the Bering Strait region: Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, no. 9, p. 211-231. Mendenhall, V. C., 1901, A reconnaissance in the Norton Bay region, Alaska, in 1900, p. 181-222, in Brooks, A. H., Richardson, G. B., Collier, A. J., and Mendenhall, V. C., Reconnaissance in Cape Nome and Norton Bay regions, Alaska: Spec. Pub. U.S. Geological Survey, 222 p. Miller, T. P., 1972, Potassium-rich alkaline intrusive rocks of western Alaska: Geol. Soc. America Bull., v. 83, no. 7, p. Miller, T. P., Elliott, R. L., Grybeck, D. H., and Hudson, T., 1971, Results of geochemical sampling in the northern Darby Mountains, Seward Peninsula, Alaska: U.S. Geol. Survey open-file report, p. 12. Patton, W. W., Jr., and Csejtey, Bela, Jr., 1967, Preliminary geologic investigations of western St. Lawrence Island, Alaska: U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 684-C, 15 p. Patton, W. W., Jr., 1967, Regional geologic map of the Candle quadrangle, Alaska: U.S. Geol. Survey Misc. Geol. Inv. Map 1-492. Sainsbury, C. L., Hedge, C. E., and Bunker, C. H., 1970, Structure, stratigraphy, and isotopic composition of rocks of the Seward Peninsula, Alaska [abs.]: Am. Assoc. Petroleum Geologists Bull., v. 54, no. 12, p. 2502-2503.

Sainsbury, C. L., Hudson, T., Ewing, R., and Marsh, W. R., 1972, Reconnaissance geologic map of the Solomon D-5 and C-5 quadrangles: U.S. Geol. Survey open-file report, p. 12.
Smith, P. S., and Eakin, H. M., 1911, A geologic reconnaissance in southeastern Seward Peninsula and the Norton Bay-Nulato region, Alaska: U.S. Geol. Survey Bull. 449, 146 p.
Winkler, H. G. F., 1967, Petrogenesis of metamorphic rocks: SpringerVerlag, New York, Inc., 237 p.
11

