oo
Bo o £T
s 3
\ V

TA3LS C
Page
Ciyj&iATic,*! -------------- i
Stratigraphy '----------------- i
Alluvial Deposits ------------ 2 !&>en.i£opi Formation ------------ 2 Kaibab Limestone ------------- 2 Supai ?orsation ------------- 3 Bird Spring jTorsation ---------- 3
5 OIL AND OA3 ?0-J;;I3ILIT1^3 ----------- 6
DEPTH3 ---------------- 7
TABLES -lH.^r« JTO^LvTION-J OF TE2 a=?aDT-'a K27ADA ------------------ -9, 10, U

ON GEOLOGIC aSCOWEAISSAMCi; Off TE£ N^AR LAS VBSrtS, CLAHS COUHTT, IJS7AJ5A
By J. C. Miller
GKN2H.& INFORMATION
Plane table work on the Arden anticline area was started on November 26 and continued until December 20, 1944. The area covered by this investigation ia between 5 and 12 miles southwest of the city of Las Tegaa and generally west of the Salt Lake branch of the Union Pacific Railroad, The center of the area can be reached from the Las Yegas-Loa Angeles highway (TJ. 3. - 91), by a black-top road to Blue Diamond and ita northern part by a gravel road leading therofroa to Red Rock Canyon and Willow Springs.
Available geologic information on this area eonaiats of an unpublished report and an areal sap by Longrcell and Hewett dravm on the Las Tegas and Ixanpah topographic sheets, scale 1:250,000, in addition to several letter reports by consulting ^aologista. Bulletin 798 by Longwell, "Gtiology of the Muddy ^fountains, Nevada," and Professional Paper 162 by Hewett, "Geology and Ore Deposits of the Goodsprlngs Quadrangle, Nevada,* furnish information on the stratigraphy of adjacent areas*
The nomenclature used is the sar^e &s given by Hewett in Professional Paper 162. Sections of the exposed rocks were examined in Frenchisun fountain and in the IJuddy Mountains. The accompanying table of fonsations is taken from this publication*
-A-

Deposits
Tne total thickness of alluvium, tool son deposits, and caliche is unknown* T&a caliche beds attain a thickness of 15 feet end their inclination conforms generally with the eastward slope of the valley floor. ISost of the cemented material is composed of angular to rounded coarse gravel and boulders from the lines tones that crop out in the area to the west*
Although Pleistocene lake deposits were observed west of the ^uddy Mountains northeast of Las Vegas, the presence of lake deposits in the area under consideration was not noted*
itoenkopi Formation
The ^oenkopi formation in this area appears to consist mainly of thin-bedded sandstone, shale, gypsum, and limestone more or less gypsiferoua* This formation occupies several square miles in the jouth central part of T* 21 3., H* 59 S« and north central part of T* 22 3., R* 59 2* , but was observed by the writer only in section 14 of the latter tranship* In ta» Frenchman fountain section alternating greenish and yellowish beds predominate in the upper part* The section as a whole, however, is pro dominantly buff in color with numerous gypsiferous beds* tfce thickness of beds assigned to the *toenkopi is 750 faet to 950 feet* It is separated . from the Kaibab limestone by an erosional unconformity*
laibab Limestone
The Kaibab limestone consists of two massive gray limestone beds separated by about 50 feet of red shale, sandstone, and gypsum* The thickness of this formation varies between 410 feet &nd 950 feet over
-2-

widely separated areas. T.iy /jypauni or anhydrita bed has been dxtcnai mined in the nortnwestern part of tha area by the United 3tates Gypsum Company. This bed is now being mined by tha Blue Diamond Gypsum Conpany about 4 ailea west of the outcrop srhich is shown by a chain pattern on the aap. The distinguishing feature of the upper Saibab li^estona in this area
» appears to be an abundance of foaails mainly crinoida. In the outliers in section 29, T. 21 S* t 3* 60 E., and section 22, T. 22 S., H. SO 3., the beds are warped sli/^itly and their eastward dip of 5° to 8° flattens, within a few hundred feet, to approximately the dip of the surface. The sharp face of the outliers is westward.
Supai ?onaation
Where exposed in the area exomined, the Supai consists of rad and white sands and sandy shale a with a probable total thickness of 15CO feet* The uppermost bed of sandstone is thick and masairely cross-bedded. The bed quarried in section 5, T« 23 S. , S R. 60 2., is a Tory pure sand cocposed of aubangular to well-rounded quartz grains with an occasional snail particle of red shale, A layer of sandstone about one-half inch thick exposed in this quarry is composed of nearly perfect quartz crystals 0.5 ara or leas in cross section. This sandstone is also exposed at the br.se of tha cliff west of the Comnonwealth well.
Bird Spring Formation
The Bird Spring formation occupies most of the southern part of the area examined in reconnaissance* According to Hewett f s description on pages 21 and 22 of Professional Paper 162
-3-

* ...The formation consists essentially of liiaestone, ahala, and sandstone, but rsany bods, and even large thic-inssses over considerable areao, that were originally limestone have been altered to dolomite* 'Iha estimated maximum thickness of 2,500 faet includes many thin beds in the upper 1,000 feet that were doubtless originally doloaita, but it appears probable that the remaining lover part was made up wholly of limestone, shale, and sandstone* Sand is present as distinct beds, and grains of sand are uniformly distributed through many of the beds of limestone.
"The beds of limestone range from the thinnest laminae to maaaiYe layers 60 feet thick* Several of the thickest beds occur near the base, but others lie about 1,000 feet above it* There are numerous good exposures of sections 200 to 400 feet thick in which znoat of the beds range from 2 to 15 feet thick, whereas here and there 50-foot sections contain no beds more than a foot thick* Thus, it stands in striking contrast to the underlying massive formations. ... The beds of limestone also display a wider range in color than exists in the lower formations* Moat of the beds are bluish gray, but they range from nearly black to white* Some of the higher beds in the Spring Mountains and the Bird Spring Honge weather reddish bro^n, thereby indicating an appreciable content of iron* In general the light colors indicate the presence of dolomite, but here and there, as in sac* 32, T» 23 S«, 3* S3 2*, alteration to dolomite has not produced any change in color*
"The limestones of the formation are uniforaly fine grained .or porcelainlike in texture* A few show sporadic crystalline areas that represent fragments of orinoid steins* The dolosdtized beds are more coarsely crystalline* From the few thin sections that have been studied it appears that the fine texture of the limestone is due to the small size of the organisms or fragments that make them up* The dark colors are due to finely disseminated earbon and hydrocarbons* and theaa yield a fetid odor when the rock is broken* During the process of dolomitization the hydrocarbons were largely eliminated*
"Small quantities of chert are present persistently throughout the formation, although it is most abundant near the base*.
"Only a few beds of clean sandstone are recorded, but many beds of apparently fine limestone contain 5 to 50 per cent of sand grains * * Weathered surfaces of such beds show cross-bedding* In the several specimens that have been examined the r^nga in size is 0*02 to 0*10 millimeter, but in single specimens the range is much less* About 90 per cent of the grains are clear quartz, but feldspar (mieroperthite and plagioclase) are also present, and zircon is en accessory. The grains are largely subangular, but a few of the largest are well rounded.
"The thickest and most persistent sandstone in the formation is that which lies at the base* Although the outcrop of this sandstone is nowhere conspicuous, it extends throughout the region

uh of Columbia rssii. "/liars exposed in the .rarizin.^s o^ t'.io Yellow Pine .-oiiie it is 23 to 23 feat thick, .p"le yallowich aro-.si, fine grnined, and without distinct bedding* On the surface fromthe Contact mine northwest to the Ninety-nine nine and around Potosi Mountain. to the Potoai nine it is thin bedded and disfcirLzuijhed by ro und/oarsiags , probably due to oxidized pyrite. 2*or a distance of 1,200 feat near the 3nowstora nine, the sandstone zone la largely occupied by a bed of conglomerate 'whose rnsxinura thickness is 10 feet* ».
wThia bed of sandstone and conglomerate is not noticeably uneonforsable on the underlying beds, but other features indicate that it marks a persistent unconformity in the strntigr^phic section* ..«
Tossils are cosaon in the lower part of the foraation ^nd are abundant in 30210 beds 100 to 300 feet above the base. A few beds may be recognized with assurance rather widely, not only on account of the fossil species present but by their abundance* *
The Bixc Spring formation whers obserrad consists of hard gr-ay to rvhita
limestone and do1omita vjith soae relatively thin 3'*ndy members.
According to the Eewett-Longwell report (unpublished): wThe region
under discussion Is structurally cozrclex. . .. Existing outcrops indicate
the presence of anticlines near Ardan and Sloan and others may e^ist under
the cover of Tertiary rocks in Las Tegaa valley."
In general, the taain structural features of the napped arsa are tl) the
northwest-southeast trending Arden anticline in the northwestern part, (2)
the generally east-west trending anticline west of Sloan in the southern part,
and (3) the saall anticlinul area east of Sloan in the southeastern part.
The Arden anticline is terminated on the north by a faulted area in 7. 21 3.,
R, 39 S. North of this faulted block, vfhich involves members of the Zaibab
and Supai formations at the surface, the Aztec 3 indstone is faulted dcvra.
To the south this anticline is not traceable beneath tho alluvium cover but
it is believed to die out in the flats west of Bard, on the north flcink of
the complex structural depression that separates it frora the transverse Sioan
anticline further south. The broader basin of which thii depression a pears
.5-

to be a minor p-j.rt oxtanda /es~v?ard fro:i the fyiibab eacarpcisnta four ;iilea. On tha wast this basin is limited by eastward dipping beds in the belt of complex nortli- south faulting alons tha etttat front of the Bird Spring Range.
Tha Sloan anticline, trending .slightly south of ~ost, at ri.^ht angles to tha Arden anticline, raay be in part th» result of igneous intrusion* This fold appears to be a subsidiary flexure on the northward sloping limb of the major structural basin that centers about the Blue Diaisond carsp west of the aapped area and exposes the Pannsylvanian Bird 3pring fornation in its southern rim.
The third anticlinal area is east of the northwest-aoutheast trsnding aorn»l fault a-ipped by Longwell and Hewett a ails aaat o? 31can and is the asnlloat in exteat* It modifies the relatiT-ily upthvown aids of that fault to a minor degree but no attaapt was z&de to determine its features because it3 aurfnce is occupied in greater p.'.rt by pre-Ponnaylvnnion rocks.
^ia proximity of forr.sr Tclcnnic activity su^ast« tlid poaaibility of intrusion rather than folding aa the cause of aoae at least of the discordant dipa observed in tho southern part of the *^rden area. There la the additional possibility that fusion of the limestone bed^ by intrudive nasaes caused tha erratic surface dips observed in some places. 3oii;e distortion of Kaibeb beds sight result from the welling and change to gypsua of interbedded anhydrite subjected to weathering.
OH ASP G^3 ?03 31511^71 K3
According to Longwell and Hewott the known anticlinal area -2 of th region do not appear to ba favorable for the occurrence of oil and gns, as indicated by the follow in.; quotations froa their unpubliahed report: "The ??ileozoic formations of this region do not appear to be highly favorable sources for
-G-

oil and. 333. ... -balsa ^nd sandstones aro rather ;ii.:hly indurated -.'net co-.r. ".ct ; the lizestoaes < nd dolomites are dense." However, these ^utjors also state that "The only rocks in the entire Paleozoic section that -ira noticeably c^rt-jaaeaeua and yield a fetid odor whon freshly fractured are found ia the lower 300 faet of the Bird Spring f-Tr^iatioa. . .. Usis zone ia clearly the nost favorable source for oil sad gas in the entire Paleozoic section. *
Existing outcrops indicate the presence of anticlines near Arden and Sloan and others may exist under the cover of Tertiary rocks ia Las Tegas Vallay. If reservoir conditions were £Ood and these anticlines were without fnults, they might offer favorable sites for exploratory drilling, but 'the nunber and kind of faults that are known nearly discourage the prospect.*9
The paucity of orsanic shales or othar likely sources of pstroleun in the entire thickness of sedimentary rocks involved ia i further deterrent to tha expectation of consequential accumulations of oil or gas in tho Ardaa arsa«
Correlation of surface exposures with tha subsurface beds logged by the two wells drilled is rather difficult on the basis of present info ration. The Comrjanwealth Oil Company well, apparently higher structurally, at.irfca in excess of 300 feet, perhaps SCO faet, belo^t the top of the Supai formation. The well continued in the Supai to a depth of 975 feet and then entered tte Bird Spring formation. Drilling was continued in that formation to the total depth of 1870 feet* According to this correlation, the entire thickness of Bird Spring formation should be penetrated in this well at a dspth of 3400 to 3500 feet. Showings of gas v;ere reported at dap the of SCO to 805 feet and 1560 to 1575 feet in this well and rumors of numerous oil shows are prevalent. The Red Star-Nelson well nay have started about the top of the 3upai, ignoring the thickness of alluvium cover, and entered tne Bird 3priag formation at a

of 1524 faet. It. ia reported shat well s^plaa at tie total day til of 3iiQ4 feet showed hydrocarbons on testing with carbon tetrachlo.ide. According to the foregoing correlation and to Eewett's raeaaurcaent of thicknesa of tfce Bird Spring formation, 2500 feet, the Nelson well if drilled to 3800 feet should penetrate the lower part of the Bird Spring foznstion, the bottom of which should occur at a depth not in excess of 4000 feet* Any wells planned for testing the lower 300 feet of the Bird Spring forciation in structures near Sloan on the south should provide a drilling depth of S50C feet, or less, depending on their location and position*

torch 24, 1945

J. C. Miner

-8-

Formations of the Goodsprlngs qundrnn^le,

»
Aro olnsalf Icatlon : *

Exposed in Ooodsprln^s quadrankle

*

Formation :

Character

jUnconaolldated mud, send, coarse

Recnnt

lAlluvlum

:grevel ond boulders of locel origin

* iCemrntod send end gravel of local

j Lower (later) :or1 In on the hills went of

Pleistocene

rgravel.

ifJobdsprlngi .

ttjnconaolldated send, coarse grevel,

: Higher (earlier) tend boulders, largely from remote

: gravel

isource but partly local.

: s Tuff s, breccia, end flows of latlte

Tort lory U-5ocnne?) :Volcanlc rocks. za^deslte, rbyollte, end beselt

*« :MassIve ledge of reddish or buff

Jurnnalc (?)

tAztec sandstone : sandstone, minutely cross-bedded.

* : Reddish shaly sandstone and shale

TJppor Trio sole

:Chlnle Formation rwtth several beds of chert and

tUmestone conglomerate*

: :0ne or tw? beds of limestone end

Upper (?) Trinsslc :Shlnarump con:tlom4ohert conglomerate separated by

terete.

isendy shale.

: rThln-becided buff limestone underlain

: :by green and red shale end conglom-

r^oenkopl f ormetlonerpte end overlain by red sandy shale.

: rTuff and conglomerate of Igneous

: :pebbles overlie the limestone member

;Unconformlty

:2 miles vest of Ooodsprlngs.

: :Two massive ledges of gray limestone

*Kalbab limestone : separated by 20 to 30 feet of buff

^to red shale an'1- sandstone.

!>rmJen«

:

tReddlsh sandsto.ie separating red and

Supal formation. greenish shaly sandstone below from

;red gypsum-bearing shaly sandstone

j above.

Thickness U'eet)

Spring : Frenchmen

Ktn.

Win.

50-100

50-125 0-200 2,100

2,000

1,000^ 10-30

700
/ 25-50

750-950 1,500

410-555* 600

1,0001,100

1,000

; :0ray limestone and dolomite in beds

: ranging in thickness from thinnest

^nnaylvani nn .

f Ird Spring forrca- :lemlnae to GO fert, separeted by

tion.

! shale and sandstone. From Good-

5 springs northward o conglomeratic

sspndstone at base.

Unoonformi ty :

:°-evprel beo's of dark-gray limestone

:thnt locally weather as a massive

: ledge* In places completely alteredis

tto dolomite.

s Thin-bedded blue and gray limestone

:alternsting with gray shale; highly

rfoss'liferous; no chert.

zMas's'Ive il^ht-grry limestone, now

1 nrjtas.lpplan

Monte Crlsto lime- ilargely dtered to cream-colored and

middle and lower) stone. _

jv.hlte dolomite; n^-ert uncommon* :Mnsslve &ray limestone with numerouij:

sthln chert layers; in places large

:belts are altered to dolomite;

inumerous fossils.

:Th' In- bedded dork-grey limestone;

rlittle chert; In large pert of area

taltered to dolomite; numerous

tfosslls.

;Very thin-bedded ll^ht-grny liire-

istonejfi no fossils or chert.

)o von 1. an .

Sultm limestone. iLighi-gray Itmentone and dolomite;

inumerous fo sslls*

!l)arlr-gray to black dolomite, in feeds1!

: . :P to 5 feet thick; few fossils.

j Thin-tedded li^ht and dark gray

)r»vonlan (?) to Ooodsprlngs dolo- :mottled dolomite, with some mag-

fpper Cambri an* mite,

tnesian limestone end locally near

:top 50 to 75 feet of dolomltteend j

jsandy shale; very few fossils.

it

t 2,500^ :

2,500

* 60-120

10-20 185-500

j i)

t)
65-400 i)

800

60-400 *
150-260 :)
75-580 :)
5-125 I)

500

2,450* I I

2,000

-10-

Hot exposed in Qoodsprlngg quadrm

Kiddle Cambrian.
£lr,onfclnn. frchean*

Bright Angel shale. Tapeats sandstone.

: Green mlceceous shale and brownish

r sandstone; oonta'ns trolls but few

:fosslls.

24CH 400

:Brorn53h sandstone, thin bedded* 130-^ 125 Conglomerate, quart zlt**, and dolo:roite exposed 1n Kingston Mountains :and possibly present beneath the iPeleosoJc rocks of the western parl :of the Qoodsp rings quadrangle* iReddlsh granite gneiss. :
tJ

-11-

