UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT Of THE INTERIOR GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
Radioactivity and geochemistry of selected mineral-spring waters in the Western United States Basic data and multivariate statistical analysis By J. Karen Felmlee and Robert A. Cadigan
Open-File Report 82-324 1982
This report is preliminary and has not been reviewed for conformity with U.S. Geological Survey standards editorial.

Contents Page
Abstract................................................................. 1 Introduction............................................................. 2
Purpose of study..................................................... 2 Area of study........................................................ 4 Previ ous work........................................................ 5 Acknowledgments...................................................... 6 Methods of study......................................................... 6 Field measurements, sample collection, and laboratory analysis....... 7 Evaluation of results................................................ 11 Data processing...................................................... 17 Statistical analysis................................................. 19 Data presentati on........................................................ 20 Radioactivity........................................................ 20 Other geochemical characteristics.................................... 25 Results of statistical analysis.......................................... 26 Correlation analysis................................................. 26 Factor analysis...................................................... 26 Conclusi on............................................o.................. 39 References............................................................... 41

Illustrations Page
Figure 1-8. Maps showing: 1. Mineral-spring sites visited during this study........ 46 2. Water sample localities............................... 47 3. Radium concentrations in water........................ 48 4. Radium-228 concentrations in water.................... 49 5. Uranium concentrations in water....................... 50 6. Radon concentrations in water......................... 51 7. Helium concentrations in water........................ 52 8. Water sample localities showing anomalous radi oacti vi ty....................................... 53
9. Diagram showing major-ion chemistry of sampled waters, showing common water types................................ 54
Tables Table 1. Sample site descriptions....................................... 55
2. Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States............................................... 62
3. Summary of radioactive parameters.............................. 89 4. Summary of nonradioactive parameters........................... 90 5. Matrix of correlation coefficients for all parameters.......... 92 6. Matrix of correlation coefficients for 24 parameters........... 98 7. Reordered varimax factor matrix for 24 parameters.............. 101 8. Factor score matrix for 24 parameters and 71 samples........... 102
11

Abstract Multivariate statistical analyses were performed on data from 156 mineral-spring sites in nine Western States to analyze relationships among the various parameters measured in the spring waters. Correlation analysis and Rmode factor analysis indicate that three major factors affect water composition in the spring systems studied: (1) duration of water circulation, (2) depth of water circulation, and (3) partial pressure of carbon dioxide. An examination of factor scores indicates that several types of hydrogeologic systems were sampled. Most of the samples are (1) older water from deeper circulating systems having relatively high salinity, high temperature, and low Eh or (2) younger water from shallower circulating systems having relatively low salinity, low temperature, and high Eh. The rest of the samples are from more complex systems. Any of the systems can have a relatively high or low content of dissolved carbonate species, resulting in a low or high pH, respectively. Uranium concentrations are commonly higher in waters of relatively low temperature and high Eh, and radium concentrations are commonly higher in waters having a relatively high carbonate content (low pH) and, secondarily, relatively high salinity. Water samples were collected and (or) measurements were taken at 156 of the 171 mineral-spring sites visited. Various samples were analyzed for radium, uranium, radon, helium, and radium-228 as well as major ions and numerous trace elements. On-site measurements for physical properties including temperature, specific conductance, pH, Eh, and dissolved oxygen were made. All constituents and properties show a wide range of values. Radium concentrations range from less than 0.01 to 300 picocuries per liter; they average 1.48 picocuries per liter and have an anomaly threshold value of 171

picocuries per liter for the samples studied. Uranium concentrations range from less than 0.01 to 120 micrograms per liter and average 0.26 micrograms per liter; they have an anomaly threshold value of 48.1 micrograms per liter. Radon content ranges from less than 10 to 110,000 picocuries per liter, averages 549 picocuries per liter and and has an anomaly threshold of 20,400 picocuries per liter. Helium content ranges from -1,300 to +13,000 parts per billion relative to atmospheric helium; it averages +725 parts per billion and has an anomaly threshold of 10,000 parts per billion. Radium-228 concentrations range from less than 2.0 to 33 picocuries per liter; no anomaly threshold was determined owing to the small number of samples. All of the anomaly thresholds may be somewhat high because the sampling was biased toward springs likely to be radioactive.
The statistical variance in radium and uranium concentrations unaccounted for by the identified factors testifies to the complexity of some hydrogeologic systems. Unidentified factors related to geologic setting and the presence of uranium-rich rocks in the systems also affect the observed concentrations of the radioactive elements in the water. The association of anomalous radioactivity in several springs with nearby known uranium occurences indicates that other springs having anomalous radioactivity may also be associated with uranium occurrences as yet undiscovered.
Introduction Purpose of study
Mineral springs have fascinated mankind for centuries and have long been used for medicinal purposes. Only recently has modern science sought to determine the origin of such springs and found ways to utilize the water or

precipitates for various other commercial purposes. Thermal mineral springs have been studied as possible geothermal energy sources. Minerals precipitated by spring waters have been mined for the metals they contain or for their quality as ornamental stone. Some mineral springs have provided insights into the nature of hydrothermal ore-forming solutions.
Our study was undertaken to examine the geochemical environment of radioactive mineral springs and to determine if the properties of the springs could be used as geochemical tools in uranium exploration. Data on numerous radioactive and nonradioactive parameters for both water and precipitates from a variety of springs were gathered and interpreted.
This report presents the data pertaining to the water at the springs studied. It emphasizes the radioactive properties of the mineral-spring waters and speculates on the relationship between the radioactivity in the waters and the source of radioactivity in the rocks of the associated hydrogeologic systems. It discusses the relationships among all the measured parameters, as determined by multivariate statistical analysis, and interprets the major factors affecting the geochemistry of the spring systems.
Sampling was directed toward "mineral springs" as opposed to common fresh-water springs. By definition, a mineral spring is "a spring whose water contains enough mineral matter to give it a definite taste, in comparison to ordinary drinking water, especially if the taste is unpleasant or if the water is regarded as having therapeutic value" (Gary and others, 1974). The minimum amount of mineral matter necessary to impart a taste is not stated, presumably because the amount is variable and depends on the ions or gases involved. Water containing more than 1,000 mg/L (milligrams per liter) total dissolved solids is usually considered undesirable for drinking; therefore,

most saline springs can be called mineral waters. Thermal springs are commonly used as health spas and are considered to be mineral water even though the total dissolved-solids content may be less than 1,000 mg/L. In an effort to examine a variety of mineral springs, the literature and maps were searched for references to spas or resorts and to hot springs, warm springs, salt springs, soda springs, and sulfur springs. Many mineral springs in widely scattered localities were visited, as well as fresh-water springs in some areas. The springs sampled range in dissolved-solids content from 83 to 35,000 mg/L and in temperature from 6°C to 94°C.
Area of study
From 1975 to 1980, 171 spring sites were visited in nine Western States. Water samples were collected and (or) measurements were taken at 156 sites; precipitate or sediment samples were taken at 97 sites. The distribution of sites by State is shown in the following table:

State

Total sites

Arizona----- --

California- -- - -

Colorado-- -

Idaho------------ -

Montana

--

Nevada--

lldrr 1 l^/\ 1 ^**J
Utah--

-------

Ux/nmi nn---------- . _ .

i ft 10
op
6 14
5
s/
44 m

All States

171

Water sites
10 10
23L. >J 6
14 35
5\J 4^3w
m
156

Precipitate sites
14 4 22 4 6 17 2 20 ft
97

Mineral-spring sites visited during this study are shown on figure 1 and listed in table 1. Fifteen sites in Arizona were visited by colleagues who collected samples along the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon (Peterson and others, 1977). We visited all the other sites, took various on-site measurements, and collected water or precipitate samples where appropriate. Two of the sites (one in Idaho and one in Nevada) are not shown on the map because the samples were taken with the permission of the property owners on the condition that the sample locations be considered confidential.
Water sample localities are shown on figure 2. As mentioned above, this report discusses only the water data from the mineral-spring sites visited.
Previous work Many workers have studied both radioactive and nonradioactive properties
of mineral springs and other subsurface waters. Reports by Boltwood (1905), Schlundt and Moore (1909), Scott and Barker (1962), and White, Hem, and Waring (1963) contributed much toward an early understanding of the distribution and origin of radium, uranium, and major elements in springs and subsurface waters in the United States. More recent studies in the Western United States have expanded our understanding. A study by Wollenberg (1974) yielded information on radioactivity in spring waters and in their calcareous and siliceous precipitates. Other work by O'Connell and Kaufmann (1976) and Barrett and Pearl (1976) provided data on radioactive isotopes in thermal springs. Numerous other reports have investigated the nonradioactive properties and

constituents of hot or cold mineral springs in the West. Among these are reports by Mundorff (1970, 1971); Mallory and Barnett (1973); Young and Mitchell (1973); Sanders and Miles (1974); Chadwick and Kaczmarek (1975); Mariner, Presser, and Evans (1976, 1977); and Feth and Barnes (1979).
Acknowledgments We express our thanks to the many property owners who permitted us to
sample their springs. We also thank the following people for their contributions to the study: James E. Peterson, S. Eugene Buell, and Charles S. Spirakis for their work in the Grand Canyon; Brenda A. Steel e-Mallory, Cheryl W. Adkisson, and Robin E. Glanville for their assistance in field work; and Cheryl W. Adkisson and Barbara Dodge for their assistance in computer processing of the data. Some of the laboratory analytical work was done by Paul R. Barnett and L. Mei (some spectrographic analyses), Oliver J. Feist, Jr. (some radium analyses), G. Michael Reimer (all helium analyses), and Marian Schnepfe (some uranium analyses). Most other laboratory work was done by various people under the supervision of Earl S. Skinner at the U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Division Central Laboratories.
Methods of study During the course of this study several changes were made in the types of field measurements done, in the methods of sample collection and treatment for some elements, in the methods of sample analysis for some elements, and in the number of elements analyzed. Some changes were necessitated by changes in the capabilities and procedures of the U.S. Geological Survey laboratories where the samples were analyzed. Other changes were judged desirable as new

information became available. As a result, the data set is an incomplete one; that is, not all samples have data for all variables. Also, data for some parameters were obtained by different methods, and they had to be tested for comparability before being combined and used in statistical analysis. Specific problems are discussed where appropriate.
Field measurements, sample collection, and laboratory analysis Temperature, pH, and specific conductance were measured in the field at
all sites. Temperature was measured at the surface as near the source of each spring as possible and was recorded to the nearest degree celsius. The pH was measured by means of a combination glass electrode with a silver/silver chloride reference and was recorded to the nearest tenth of a pH unit. Specific conductance was measured using standard instrumentation that compensates for temperature and standardizes the reading to 25 C.
Dissolved oxygen and (or) oxidation-reduction potential were measured in the field at some of the sites. Dissolved oxygen was measured using a probe with a potassium chloride solution and a membrane filter. The probe was calibrated in air-saturated water, and readings were corrected for altitude. The probe was submerged a few centimeters to a meter in the spring pool, depending on pool depth, or held in running water emerging from an orifice. Oxidation-reduction potential, or Eh, was measured using a combination platinum electrode with a silver-saturated chloride reference solution. The tip of the electrode was held a few centimeters below the surface of the pool or the running water. A period of 5-10 minutes was allowed for the meter reading to stabilize. Some readings stabalized immediately, but others drifted downward rapidly and then slowly approached equilibrium; the reading

was taken at the change in rate. Sodium, chloride, fluoride, and divalent cations (calcium and magnesium)
were measured in the field at various sites using specific-ion electrodes. A 100-ml (milliliter) sample or a 1- or 10-ml sample diluted to 100 ml with distilled water was used for most analyses. A 50-ml sample diluted to 100 ml with a buffering solution was used for fluoride analyses. A known-addition technique involving standard solutions was used to determine ion concentrations.
Radium-analyses were done by two similar radiochemical methods. At most sites a 1-liter sample of untreated water was collected and was later analyzed in the laboratory by the carrier-precipitation radon method. In this method the radium is coprecipitated with barium sulfate, the precipitate is centrifuged and then dissolved, and the solution is purged with helium to remove existing radon. The solution is then allowed to equilibrate for 2-20 days, after which it is again purged with helium, and an alpha count is taken on the recovered radon-222. Radium-226 is then calculated. As a result of temporary administrative constraints, many of the 1-liter untreated samples, mostly those collected in Nevada, were analyzed by the carrier-precipitation planchet method. In this method the radium is coprecipitated with barium sulfate, and the precipitate is collected on a filter, or planchet. The planchet is allowed to equilibrate for at least 15 days before an alpha count is taken. Total radium is then calculated. Both of the above methods are discussed in Thatcher, Janzer, and Edwards (1977). At some sites, mostly those visited late in the study, a 1-liter sample of water was filtered through a 0.45-ym (micrometer) membrane and then acidified with 2 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid or 2 ml of 6 N nitric acid in the field. These

samples were later analyzed for radium-226 by the radon method. Analyses for radium-228 were done on a selected number of 1-liter
untreated samples by a method involving separation and counting of actinium228, as discussed in Thatcher, Janzer, and Edwards (1977). Chemical separation is achieved using a series of precipitations and digestions with lead, barium, and yttrium carrier solutions. A beta count is done on the actinium-228, and the radium-228 is then calculated.
Uranium analyses were done by fluorometric methods. At most sites a 1liter sample of untreated water was taken. These samples were later analyzed in the laboratory by direct fluorometry and then, if necessary, by extraction fluorometry; those samples showing less than 30 percent quenching or those having uranium contents above 0.3 yg/L (micrograms per liter) by the direct method did not require further analysis by the extraction method. The direct method involves evaporating a water sample to dryness and then fusing the residue with a fluoride-carbonate flux. The fluorescence of the fused disk is determined under ultraviolet light in a reflection-type fluorometer. The extraction method involves preconcentrating the uranium by coprecipitation with aluminum phosphate. The precipitate is then dissolved in dilute nitric acid, the uranium is extracted with ethyl acetate or ethyl ether, and the solution is then evaporated, fused, and fluoresced. Both the direct and the extraction methods are discussed in Thatcher, Janzer, and Edwards (1977). At numerous sites a 1-liter sample was filtered through a 0.45-ijm membrane and then acidified in the field with 2 ml of 6 N nitric acid (mostly samples from Nevada) or of concentrated hydrochloric acid (mostly samples collected late in the study). These samples were analyzed by fluorometric methods also.
Radon was measured in the field using a modified alpha spectrometer

(Reimer, 1977) which had been calibrated with a 100-pCi/L standard. For each determination, a 2-liter sample of water was collected in a 2.8-liter plastic container; at some sites a 0.75-liter sample of water was collected in a 1liter container. The lid was sealed, and the container was shaken vigorously for 1 minute. Using a syringe, a 50-ml sample of the air-gas mixture in the top of the container was taken through a self-sealing valve in the lid. The gas sample was then inserted into a partial vacuum in the alpha-counting chamber of the spectrometer. The sample was counted for 1 minute, recounted after a 1-minute wait, and then recounted after a 2-minute wait. The last count was corrected back to a time of 1 minute and then adjusted mathematically to obtain the value of radon-222 in picocuries per liter.
Helium samples were taken at a few sites and analyzed later by mass spectrometer. A 0.75-liter sample of water was collected in a 1-liter container and shaken vigorously for 1 minute. A 20-ml sample of the air-gas mixture was drawn from the container using a syringe, and the sample was then injected into a vacuumized stainless steel cylinder for transport to the laboratory.
Samples for analysis of major ions and trace-element constituents were taken at most sites. A 1-liter sample filtered through a 0.45-ym membrane and acidified with 2 ml of 6 N nitric acid was collected for analysis of major cations; a 250-ml sample, filtered but not acidified, was collected for major anions; a 250-ml untreated sample was collected for alkalinity and for laboratory pH and specific conductance; and a 1- or 4-liter sample filtered and acidified with nitric acid was collected for analysis of minor elements. At some of the sites, particularly those visited early in the study, samples were not collected. Instead, we have used published data available from
10

recent sampling by other investigators whose analyses were done in U.S. Geological Survey laboratories, as noted in table 2 of this report.
Trace-element constituents of the water were analyzed by SPEC (emission spectrography), AA (atomic absorption spectroscopy), ICP (inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy), or WC( wet-chemistry) methods. Changes in administrative policy necessitated a change from one laboratory in the U.S. Geological Survey to another during part of the study. Semi-quantitative SPEC analyses were done by both laboratories. However, different suites of elements were determined, so Sb, La, Nd, Sc, W, Yb, and Y were determined in one laboratory but not the other. Although detection limits for Al and Fe were so high in one laboratory that no values greater than the detection limit were reported, WC data were reported for these elements.
Changes in laboratory procedures necessitated a change from a SPEC to an ICP method of analysis for many trace elements during the latter part of the study. A semi-quantitative ICP method was chosen over a quantitative one because the suite of elements to be determined was more consistent with the suite determined by the semi-quantitative SPEC method. Subsequently it became apparent that the semi-quantitative ICP data have a larger variance than the semi-quantitative SPEC data, and consequently some of the ICP data were suitable for statistical purposes and some were not, as discussed below.
Evaluation of results The use of different methods of sample treatment and analysis during the course of this study, as well as the use of published data, has necessitated an evaluation of the comparability of analytical results obtained by these different methods before the data could be combined for use in statistical analysis. As discussed below, the variations attributed to different methods
11

were considered acceptable for most results, but the variations in some results were considered excessive. Data with excessive variations were omitted from table 2 and from the statistical procedures.
Samples analyzed for radium-226 by the radon method but collected by different procedures yielded similar analytical results in this study, as indicated by duplicate samples collected at three sites. At Baker Hot Springs (UT23) an untreated sample and a filtered sample acidified with hydrochloric acid yielded 3.5 and 3.6 pCi/L radium, respectively. At Utah Hot Springs (UT10) an untreated sample and a filtered sample acidified with nitric acid had 66 and 69 pCi/L, respectively, and at Stinking Springs near Manti (UT36A) an untreated sample and a filtered sample acidified with nitric acid had 38 and 36 pCi/L, respectively. Such small variations in analytical results on these samples indicate that radium values determined on other samples treated in these different ways can be treated as one population for statistical analysis.
Samples analyzed for radium-226 by the radon method and for total radium by the planchet method yielded compatible results at high concentrations but somewhat less compatible results at lower concentrations. The concentration of radium-226 should be equal to or less than the concentration of total radium at any one spring, the difference in values being made up by radium228. Direct comparison of all three values was possible at only one site. At Monte Neva Hot Springs (NV18) samples yielded 110 pCi/L radium-226, 120 pCi/L total radium, and 33 pCi/L radium-228. Although the radium-226 and radium-228 add up to more than the value for total radium, these results are compatible within the limits of precision of the methods used (+10 percent for radium-226 and radium-228 and +20 percent for total radium). Direct comparison of values
12

for radium-226 and total radium was possible at only one other site. At Wilson Health Springs (UT18) samples yielded 130 pCi/L for both radium-226 and total radium. Apparently, at these high concentrations of radium, radium-228 constitutes a relatively small proportion of the total radium, so the values for radium-226 and total radium are similar. Direct comparison of values for radium-226 and radium-228 was possible at several other sites. At most of those sites, radium-226 exceeded radium-228, but at some sites in Montana, samples yielded relatively greater proportions of radium-228; for example, at Jardine Hot Spring (MT13), values are 3.7 pCi/L radium-226 and 5.7 pCi/L radium-228, giving a value for total radium of about 9.4 pCi/L. Apparently, at these lower concentrations, the values for radium-226 and for total radium are no longer equal or nearly so, although they are still the same order of magnitude. Additional sampling of radium-226, radium-228, and total radium at a number of other sites is needed to better judge the expected variation in measured concentrations of radium-226 and total radium. For this report the concentrations were judged to be similar enough for use in statistical analysis, so values for radium-226 and total radium have both been used as "radium" values in this report. Values for radium-228 have been used and designated separately.
Uranium analyses done by extraction or direct fluorometry on untreated samples yielded results similar to analyses done on filtered samples acidified with nitric acid in the field. Duplicate samples were collected at nine sites for direct comparison (CA4, NV6A, NV6B, NV14, NV18, NV33, UT10, UT18, and UT36A). A statistical t_ test for paired data showed that the two methods of sample treatment yield values that are not significantly different. Therefore, both types of results were used in the data matrix.
13

Some uranium analyses were done on samples filtered and then acidified with hydrochloric acid. The results are similar to the other uranium values for this study, as indicated by samples from two sites. At Wilson Health Springs (UT18), an untreated sample, a filtered sample acidified with nitric acid, and a filtered sample acidified with hydrochloric acid had 0.13, 0.09, and 0.17 pg/L uranium, respectively. At Baker Hot Springs (UT23), an untreated sample and a filtered sample acidified with hydrochloric acid had 0.05 and 0.15 pg/L, respectively. These results were considered comparable for our purposes, but they suggest that at very low concentrations some of the filtered-acidified samples may have yielded higher uranium values than the untreated samples.
Samples collected at the same sites on different dates separated by a year or more yielded comparable analytical results for radium, uranium, and radon. Pairs of values for radium at six sites (C014, C015, C017, UT9A, UT36A, and UT41), for uranium at seven sites (C014, C015, C017, NV18, UT9A, UT36A, and UT41), and for radon at nine sites (C010, C012A, C012B, C022, NV18, UT9A, UT18, UT19, and UT23) were used for comparison. Statistical _t_ tests for paired data showed that there is no significant effect on the radium, uranium, or radon values due to the difference in date of sampling, probably because the relatively deep circulation systems keep discharge fluctuations to a miniumum. Therefore, the use of data for samples collected on different dates over a period of several years is considered valid for statistical purposes.
Samples analyzed for radium and uranium by the Environmental Protection Agency, as reported in O'Connell and Kaufmann (1976) and Barrett and Pearl (1976), yielded results similar to ours for the 22 sites we both sampled (AZ17, AZ18, CA4, C02, C03, C017, C019, C021, C025, NV9, NV18, NM1, NM5, UT5B,
14

UT9A, UT10, UT11, UT12, UT14, UT23, UT41, and UT44). Likewise, radon measurements done by the Environmental Protection Agency were similar to our measurements for the 7 sites we both tested (CA4, C017, UT5B, UT9A, UT10, UT23, and UT41). Differences in the date of sampling had no significant effect, as discussed above; therefore, it was possible to evaluate the variation in results that can be attributed to the difference in agencies. Statistical _t tests for paired data showed that analyses done by the two agencies are not significantly different. As a result, data obtained by the Environmental Protection Agency were used to supplement our data matrix for a few sites we visited but did not sample.
Eh values were obtained in the field, and although they are susceptible to various problems, they are thought to be qualitative measurements of oxidation-reduction potential adequate for statistical purposes. Many of the measured Eh values are probably higher (more oxidizing) than the true Eh of the water because they reflect surficial oxygen as well as other ions and chemical reactions and, therefore, represent upper limits. Several of the values probably reflect the stability of ferrous-ferric iron reactions or the presence of hydrogen sulfide. In general, the positive Eh values were measured in waters that also contain the most dissolved oxygen. Many negative values were measured in waters carrying dissolved ferrous iron, as noted by iron oxide precipitates forming at the spring orifices; the strongest negative values were measured in waters smelling of hydrogen sulfide.
Measurements for fluoride done in the field by specific-ion electrode compare well with analyses done in the laboratory on collected samples, but measurements for chloride, sodium, and divalent ions (calcium and magnesium) do not compare well. Graphic comparisons and correlation analyses show a good
15

correlation of field and laboratory measurements for chloride and sodium, with correlation coefficients of 0.97 for each element; however, field measurements for chloride tend to be higher than laboratory measurements at values over 10,000 mg/L, and field measurements for sodium tend to be higher than laboratory measurements at values over 1,000 mg/L, so statistical _t_ tests indicate significant differences in results. The differences are probably the result of interference in the electrode measurements by other ions present in the water at these high concentrations. Similarly, the electrode measurements of divalent ions are significantly different from laboratory analyses of calcium and magnesium probably because of the presence of other ions, such as strontium and barium, in substantial amounts. As a result of all these comparisons, field measurements for fluoride at sites where samples were not collected for laboratory analysis were used to supplement the laboratory data in the statistical analyses, but field measurements for the other ions were not used.
Analyses for Al, Fe, and Mn done by SPEC methods compare well with those done by WC methods. Direct comparison of Fe and Mn values was possible at many sites, but direct comparison for Al was possible at only two sites (NV18 and UT18). Statistical jt^ tests for paired data showed that there are no significant differences in either Fe or Mn values due to a difference in analytical methods. Values for Al were difficult to evaluate because detection limits were so high for the SPEC data; however, the general distribution of WC values is similar to the distribution of SPEC values reported for other samples.
Analyses for some elements done by SPEC, AA, and WC methods compare well with those done by the semi-quantitative ICP method used in this study, but
16

analyses for other elements do not compare well. Direct comparison of ICP values with other values was possible at only three sites (NV18, UT18, and UT23) where more than one method of analysis was used on the samples collected. Otherwise, a general comparison of ICP values with the values obtained using other methods was relied upon. Values for Cd, Cr, Co, Cu, Ga, Ge, Pb, Ni, Ag, Sn, V, and Zr determined by the ICP method appear to be too high; therefore, these ICP data are not shown in table 2 and were not used in statistical analysis. However, values for Al, Ba, Be, B, Fe,, Li, Mn, Mo, Sr, and Zn seem to be comparable (that is, values determined by SPEC or AA methods generally fall within the range of plus or minus two steps from the reported ICP value, where steps are 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, and so on). These ICP data are shown in table 2 and were used in statistical analysis. One element, Ti, showed consistently low ICP values relative to the SPEC data, but because some of the SPEC data were doubtfully high, it was difficult to evaluate either the ICP data or the SPEC data. Therefore, Ti values are not shown and were not used in the statistical analysis. Data processing
For statistical purposes, data from samples collected at different times or analyzed by different methods had to be combined to obtain one complete set of values for a given site. Where parameter values for one sample from a given site complemented parameter values for another sample from the same site, combination of data was relatively straightforward. Where parameter values for one sample were obtained by more than one method of analysis or were duplicated by parameter values for another sample, selection of data was more complex and subjective. The net result of this stage of data processing was a data matrix composed of one row for each sample site and one column for
17

each parameter. Most duplicate analyses are similar, as discussed previously, so to some
extent it didn't matter which values were selected. Selection had to be done, however, and certain biases were used. In general, measurements from this study were favored over published analyses, which were used only to fill gaps in the data. Field measurements were chosen over laboratory measurements for pH and specific conductance because field data are thought to better reflect the actual environment. For precision, the SPEC, AA, or WC data were preferred over the ICP data, and the AA data were preferred over the SPEC data. In general, SPEC data were used over WC data, but where lower limits of detection were very high in the SPEC data, the WC data were used in order to minimize the number of "less than" values.
Data recorded as greater than an upper reporting limit or less than a lower limit of detection are known as qualified values. Such data cannot be used directly in many statistical programs; they have to be omitted, or they have to be assigned arbitrary values. Water data are particularly troublesome because, although detection limits for trace elements analyzed by AA, ICP, or WC methods are constant, detection limits for elements analyzed by SPEC methods vary with the total dissolved solids content due to interference by other elements.
For this study, an effort was made to maximize the use of the data and still achieve a valid statistical analysis. Where less than 30 percent of the data for a given element in this study were below a variable detection limit or where less than 50 percent of the data were below a constant detection limit, arbitrary values were chosen to replace the qualified values. Where more than 30 percent of the data were below a variable detection limit or
18

where more than 50 percent of the data were below a constant detection limit, the qualified values were not used. Arbitrary values for "less than" values were chosen at one-fourth the lower limit of detection, to the nearest one significant digit; arbitrary values for "greater than" values were chosen at two times the upper reporting limit, to the nearest one significant digit.
Most statistical procedures assume normal distributions for the variables used; therefore, data which best approximate a normal distribution for each parameter were needed in the statistical analysis. Distributions for all parameter values except pH and Eh were found to be generally log normal; therefore, arithmetic values were used for pH and Eh in the statistical analysis, and logarithmic values were used for all other parameters.
Statistical analysis Relationships among the various measured parameters were investigated by
doing correlation and factor analysis and by inspecting scatter diagrams. Linear correlation analysis was used to evaluate pairs of covarying parameters using a data matrix of all samples and parameters. Linear correlation analysis followed by R-mode factor analysis was used to delineate groups of covarying parameters using a data matrix of selected samples and parameters. Scatter diagrams were used to note the pattern and spread of data points and to evaluate the effects of extreme values on the correlation coefficients.
Correlation analysis was first done using all samples and parameters, even though not all samples had been measured for every parameter. Because of the gaps in the data matrix, the number of valid pairs of data, as well as the value defining which coefficients are significant, was different for nearly every correlation coefficient determined. The resultant nonsymmetric matrix
19

of correlation coefficients, used in conjunction with scatter diagrams, provided a means of evaluating relationships among all the measured parameters.
Another correlation analysis was done using selected samples and parameters as a prerequisite for R-mode factor analysis. Samples and parameters were selected to obtain a data set with values for every parameter. Therefore, the number of valid pairs of data, as well as the value defining which coefficients are significant, was the same for each correlation coefficient. The resultant symmetric matrix of correlation coefficients was used as input for the factor analysis. The factor analysis was used to define groups of covarying parameters.
The methods of statistical analysis used in this report provided an objective means of delineating parameter groups, which in turn provided a basis for interpreting some of the principles and processes controlling the composition of natural water in the systems studied.
Data presentation Chemical analyses and other parameters measured on water from the 156 sites where water samples were collected are listed in table 2. Samples from more than one spring were collected at seven sites, making a total of 163 analyses. Data from samples collected on different dates, data from samples analyzed by different methods, and data taken from published reports are designated in the footnotes. Radioactivity Radium, uranium, and radon are the radioactive elements measured in the mineral-spring waters. Helium, although not radioactive, is a product of radioactive decay and was also measured. All 163 samples have data for radium
20

and uranium. Twenty samples were analyzed for radium-228. Data for radon-222 is available for 96 samples. Helium was measured in 35 samples.
The radioactive elements have a wide range of values, as summarized in table 3 and shown on figures 3-7. Radium ranges from less than 0.1 to 300 pCi/L and has a geometric mean of 1.48 pCi/L. Uranium ranges from less than 0.01 to 120 yg/L and has a geometric mean of 0.26 yg/L. Radon ranges from less than 10 to 110,000 pCi/L and has a geometric mean of 549 pCi/L. Helium ranges from -1,300 to + 13,000 ppb (parts per billion) relative to atmospheric helium (5,240 ppb) and has a geometric mean of + 725 ppb. Radium-228 ranges from less than 2.0 to 33 pCi/L; because of the large number of values below the detection limit, a mean value was not calculated.
Anomaly thresholds for the radioactive elements were defined as being two geometric deviations above the geometric mean. Threshold values determined in this way are as follows: radium, 170 pCi/L; uranium, 48 yg/1; radon, 20,000 pCi/L; and helium, 10,000 ppb. Accordingly, 10 sample sites (fig. 8) have anomalously radioactive water. Radium is anomalous in Soda Dam Hot Springs (NM1) and in Crystal Springs (UT5B). Uranium is anomalous in Yellow Soda Spring (C014), in the spring in Nye Canyon (NV28), and in Wildhorse Spring (UT19). Both radium and uranium are anomalous in Taylor Soda Spring (C015). Radon is anomalous in Alhambra hot springs and warm well (MT3 and MT4) and in Grant View hot springs (NV29). Helium is anomalous only in Utah Hot Springs (UT10).
Ratios of radium to uranium and visa versa, as well as radium and uranium to specific conductance, also provided a means of evaluating sites for anomalous radioactivity. The radium to uranium ratio multiplied by 2.95 gives a measure of radium enrichment above equilibrium with uranium in the water and
21

is designated by REF (radium enrichment factor) in table 2. Likewise, the uranium to radium ratio multiplied by 0.339 is designated by UEF (uranium enrichment factor). The ratios of radium or uranium to specific conductance give a measure of radioactive element abundance normalized by the total abundance of all other dissolved constituents. Anomaly threshold values for each of these ratios are as follows: REF, 22,000; UEF, 78; Ra/spc, 28; U/spc, 37. Accordingly, four additional sites have anomalous radioactivity, as shown on figure 8. Stinking Hot Springs (UT9A) has an anomalous REF; and Monte Neva Hot Springs (NV18), Faywood Hot Springs (NM5), and Washakie Mineral Hot Springs (WY8) have anomalous Ra/spc. Three of the sites having anomalous element values also have anomalous ratios. Soda Dam Hot Springs (NM1) has anomalous Ra/spc as well as anomalous radium, and the Alhambra warm well (MT4) has anomalous Ra/spc as well as anomalous radon. The spring in Nye Canyon (NV28) has anomalous UEF and U/spc as well as anomalous uranium.
Several of these anomalously radioactive sites are in or near areas of known uranium occurrences. Taylor Soda Spring (C015) and Yellow Soda Spring (C014) are north of the Tallahassee Creek uranium mining district (Heinrich and Bever, 1957; Epis and others, 1979); they issue from Tertiary alluvium overlying Precambrian quartz monzonite in an area of abundant Tertiary volcanic rocks. Uranium deposits in the area are in paleochannels in the alluvium. Alhambra Hot Springs and warm well (MT3 and MT4) are just east of uranium occurrences near Clancy (Roberts and Gude, 1953; Leonard and Janzer, 1977); they issue from fractured Cretaceous to Tertiary quartz monzonite and alaskite. Uranium occurrences in the area are in siliceous veins in the granitic rocks. Wildhorse Spring (UT19) is in the Spor Mountain mining district in the Thomas Range (Staatz and Carr, 1964; Lindsey, 1979); it issues
22

from Tertiary rhyolitic volcanic rocks. Uranium deposits in the area are in volcanic tuff, in breccia pipes in adjacent Paleozoic sedimentary rocks, and in nearby Tertiary beryllium-tuff beds. Grant View hot springs (NV29) are in the East Walker River area near Coal Valley (Staatz and Bauer, 1953; Nowak, 1979); they issue from fractured Mesozoic quartz monzonite. Uranium occurrences in the area are in quartz veins in the granitic rocks and also in Tertiary sedimentary rocks in fault contact with the granitic rocks. Soda Dam Hot Springs (NM1) are in the southwest part of the Jemez Mountains; they issue from Precambrian metamorphic rocks overlain by Paleozoic sedimentary rocks in an area of abundant Tertiary and Quaternary volcanic and associated sedimentary rocks (Dane and Bachman, 1965). Uranium occurs in the volcanic rocks in the area.
The association of anomalous radioactivity in mineral-spring water with areas of known uranium occurrences suggests that the other springs with anomalous radioactivity may be associated with unknown uranium occurrences. Monte Neva Hot Springs (NV18) are in Steptoe Valley near the Egan Range; they issue from valley alluvium near a faulted complex of Precambrian and Paleozoic sedimentary rocks overlain by Tertiary volcanic rocks and intruded by Tertiary granitic rocks (Stewart and Carlson, 1974). The spring in Nye Canyon (NV28) is in the Pine Grove Hills; it issues from Tertiary siliceous volcanic rocks near a contact with Cretaceous granitic rocks (Carlson and others, 1978). Crystal Springs (UT5B), Stinking Hot Springs (UT9A), and Utah Hot Springs (UT10) are on the northeast side of the Great Salt Lake basin near the Wasatch Range; they issue along north-trending faults parallel to the range front near Precambrian and Paleozoic faulted sedimentary and metamorphic rocks (Bjorklund and McGreevy, 1974; Sorensen and Crittenden, 1972). Washakie Mineral Hot
23

Springs (WY8) are in the Wind River basin; they issue from valley alluvium overlying fractured Pennsylvanian sandstone in the crest of an anticline of Paleozoic and Mesozoic sedimentary rocks (Whitcomb and Lowry, 1968). Faywood Hot Springs (NM5) are in the Mimbres River basin south of the Cobre Mountains; they issue from valley alluvium near Pennsylvanian carbonate rocks and Tertiary and Quaternary volcanic rocks (Dane and Bachman, 1965).
Notably, most of the anomalies in spring water near known uranium occurrences are for uranium and radon and are in granitic or volcanic terranes. Radon is anomalous in the springs issuing directly from fractured granitic rocks (MT3, MT4, and NV29); uranium is anomalous in springs issuing from granitic or volcanic rocks with relatively thin alluvial cover (C014, C015, and UT19). In contrast, most of the anomalies in spring water in areas with no known uranium occurrences are for radium or Ra/spc and are in varied sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic terranes. Ra/spc is anomalous in springs issuing from relatively thick alluvial fill some distance from nearby mountains composed at least in part of sedimentary rocks (NV18, NM5, and WY8); radium and REF are anomalous in springs near metamorphic and sedimentary rocks (UT9A and UT5B).
The contrast in type of anomaly between areas with known uranium occurrences and areas with no known occurrences may be related as much to a difference in geologic terrane as to the presence or absence of uranium deposits. Therefore, it is possible that certain types of anomalies are characteristic of certain terranes and may not be indicative of uranium occurrences. However, two of the springs studied in areas of known occurences have more than one type of anomaly, and one spring has only radium anomalies. Taylor Soda Spring (C015) has anomalous radium as well as uranium,
24

and the Alhambra warm well (MT4) has anomalous Ra/spc as well as radon. Soda Dam Hot Spring (NM1) has anomalous radium and Ra/spc. Therefore, anomalous radium or Ra/spc may, indeed, be indicative of uranium occurrences. The type of anomaly is apparently influenced by the geologic environment, the characteristics of the hydrologic system, and the presence of alluvial fill, as well as the presence of uranium-rich rocks. The influence of the hydrologic system and the associated geochemical environment is discussed in the following sections of this report.
Other geochemical characteristics Major-ion chemistry of the sampled waters is summarized in table 4, and a
graphic summary is given on the diagram in figure 9. The scatter of points in the diagram shows that nearly all types of water are represented. (See Hem, 1970, p. 264-270, or Hall, 1963, p. 163-164, for disscussion of water classification.) Sodium chloride and sodium bicarbonate waters are most abundant, comprising about 50 percent of the 124 samples analyzed for major ions. Calcium bicarbonate, sodium sulfate, and calcium sulfate waters constitute about 20 percent of the samples. Various other types of water composed of more than one significant cation or anion make up the remaining 30 percent of the samples.
Minor-element chemistry is also summarized in table 4. The wide range of values for nearly all the parameters indicates that a variety of springs was sampled. Some springs are particularly noteworthy in their extreme values. Sample C012B had the lowest pH and bicarbonate and the highest Fe, Al, Cu, Ni, and Y; it is from a group of springs discussed in an earlier report by Cadigan, Felmlee, and Rosholt (1976). Sample UT19 had the highest Hg; it also
25

had a very high U content and is from the Spor Mountain mining district. Sample UT18 had the highest Yb and the only recorded Nd content; it is from a group of springs near the Fish Springs Range, about 20 km from Spor Mountain. Sample AZ16 had the highest Mo and Zn; sample NV9 had the highest Cr, Co, and Pb.
Results of statistical analysis
Correlation analysis A correlation analysis using all samples and parameters was made on the
data. The matrix of linear correlation coefficients and corresponding numbers of valid data pairs is shown in table 5. Correlations were evaluated as significant at the 95-percent level for the number of valid data pairs. The correlation coefficients in table 5 were then used in selecting parameters for factor analysis.
Significant correlation coefficients involving parameters having truncated distributions were additionally evaluated by scatter diagrams. Reported values were plotted to test for the effects of extreme values. As a result, the significant correlation coefficients for nickel and silica, for silver and specific conductance, and for gallium and radium or calcium were found to be invalid.
Factor analysis R-mode factor analysis was done to elucidate relationships among the
measured parameters by objectively analyzing the variance in a correlation matrix based on those parameters. In order to do this, certain requirements
26

had to be met. First, a symmetric matrix of correlation coefficients had to be obtained by selecting samples and parameters such that all selected samples had data for all selected parameters. This selection process is discussed below. Second, unintentional weighting of the results had to be eliminated by omitting parameters strongly related to other parameters, as shown by correlation coefficients greater than 0.95 (table 5). By this process, parameters such as total dissolved solids, alkalinity, and hardness were eliminated because of their close relationships with specific conductance, bicarbonate, and calcium and magnesium concentrations, respectively.
A data matrix of 71 samples and 24 parameters was finally selected for correlation and factor analysis. The matrix of correlation coefficients for 24 parameters using 71 samples is shown in table 6. A comparison of these correlation coefficients with those for the same parameters using all samples (table 5) reveals a few differences in relative magnitude of the coefficients, such as the coefficient for pH and HC03+C03, but the differences do not alter the results of the factor analysis, as discussed below.
The parameters chosen for correlation and factor analysis included Eh, radium, uranium, most of the major ions, and many of the trace elements. In order to include Eh, many samples had to be omitted. This was done because the presence of Eh in the factor analysis significantly enhanced the interpretation of factors and parameter relationships. Also, the use of fewer samples did not significantly alter the major parameter relationships. This was determined by a trial factor analysis which did not include Eh.
Trial factor analyses were done on other selected data sets to get a more complete picture of parameter relationships, but the results of these analyses were not significantly different from the factor analysis based on the data
27

matrix of 71 samples and 24 parameters. One correlation and factor analysis included 120 samples by using only 23 parameters, omitting Eh. The parameter groups remained almost unchanged; only manganese shifted position. Another correlation and factor analysis included radon by using a data matrix of 25 parameters and the same 71 samples. None of the parameter groups changed, and the low communality shown by radon indicated that none of the major factors accounted for a substantial amount of the variation in radon values.
Evaluation of the R-mode factor analysis of the correlation matrix shown in table 6 resulted in selection of the first three factors as the major causes of variation among the 24 parameters. The reordered varimax factor matrix for the third rotation is shown in table 7. Five rotations had eigenvalues greater than 1, but the third rotation was chosen as the best for interpretation because the fourth rotation contained a factor group with only one parameter in it. The three factors account for 70 percent of the total variance. They represent major controls on water composition in the hydrogeologic environments of the spring systems and have been interpreted as follows: (1) duration of water circulation, (2) depth of water circulation, and (3) partial pressure of carbon dioxide.
Factor 1, duration of water circulation, is strongly related to the salinity of the water. Concentrations of many elements tend to get higher the longer the water is in contact with the rocks in the hydrogeologic system. This phenomenon produces saline water, which has high specific conductance and high total dissolved solids. Element concentrations are also affected by porosity and permeability of the rocks in the system, by the water-rock ratio, and by the rock composition, but the duration of circulation is thought to be the dominant overall influence. Very little data is available on actual ages
28

of circulating water, but tritium and radiocarbon ages for spring systems in Nevada, for example, indicate that older waters often have higher concentrations of sodium, potassium, chloride, and sulfate (Mifflin, 1968). Whereas the salinity of some springs, such as Glenwood Springs (C03), has been attributed to the presence of saline rocks in the system (Bass and Northrop, 1963), the salinity of other springs, such as the Salt Banks springs (AZ16), has been attributed to the "slow passage of the waters" through igneous and metamorphic rocks (Feth, 1954).
Element species in this group include the alkali metals and monovalent anions. These species tend to stay in solution once they are taken into solution. They form chloride, sulfate, or borate salts of high solubility in most near-surface and subsurface environments; therefore, they can attain very high concentrations in the water before they reach the levels necessary for precipitation. Strontium, although an alkaline-earth element, also forms compounds of relatively high solubility and, therefore, tends to stay in solution.
Several elements in the factor 1 group have moderate secondary loadings on other factors. Iron and manganese, which have only moderate loadings on factor 1, have only slightly lower positive loadings on factor 3, partial pressure of carbon dioxide. Both of these elements form oxides and hydroxides that are relatively insoluble in the near-surface environment. An increase in partial pressure of carbon dioxide lowers the pH, increases the solubility of these oxides, and causes more iron and manganese to go into solution.
Strontium, like iron and manganese, also has a moderate positive secondary loading on factor 3. As an alkaline-earth element, strontium has a geochemical behavior similar to that of the other alkaline-earth elements,
29

which constitute the cations in the factor 3 group. Solubilities of strontium sulfate and carbonate minerals are high enough to permit large concentrations of dissolved strontium to accumulate in many spring waters as the partial pressure of carbon dioxide increases.
Specific conductance and potassium also have moderate positive secondary loadings on factor 3. Specific conductance, like pH, depends on the type and amount of ions in the water. Water that has a high conductance and high concentrations of alkali metals also tends to have high concentrations of alkaline-earth metals and a moderately low pH.
Lithium, boron, molybdenum, and manganese have moderate positive secondary loadings on factor 2, depth of circulation. In this study these elements tend to have high concentrations in water of high temperature as well as high salinity.
Factor 2, depth of water circulation, is strongly related to temperature. Numerous investigators have attributed high temperatures of surface springs to deep circulation. The deeper the water circulates the hotter it becomes because of the geothermal gradient in the Earth's crust. Water temperatures observed at the surface are affected by how rapidly the water rises along conduits and by whether or not mixing with cooler water occurs near the surface, but the maxium temperature attained by the water is caused by contact with rocks at depth that are heated by conductive heat flow from within the Earth. Further discussions of temperature-depth relationships, estimation of deep reservoir temperatures from measured surface spring temperatures, and exploration of modern geothermal systems can be found in Mifflin (1968), Fournier, White, and Truesdell (1974), and Ellis (1970, 1979).
30

Element species with positive loadings in factor 2 are fluoride and aqueous silica. The solubilities of fluorite and silica polymorphs are known to be directly related to temperature, at least in the low ranges applicable to this study (0-150°C for fluorite; 0-300°C for silica) (Holland and Malinin, 1979). The solubilities of the silica polymorphs are virtually independent of salinity and pH because dissolved silica is uncharged. The solubility of fluorite, although responsive to changes in salinity and pH because of the ionic form of dissolved calcium and fluoride, is only slightly affected by salinity and is insensitive to pH over the pH and salinity ranges found in this study (Holland and Malinin, 1979).
Several parameters in the factor 2 group have negative loadings. These parameters tend to decrease in concentration with increasing temperature. Eh, a measure of oxidation-reduction potential, is negative to temperature because high-temperature water generally circulates deeply and does not carry as much dissolved oxygen as shallower circulating low-temperature water; any oxygen that may have been taken into solution at shallow depths is likely to react at higher temperatures and be lost to the surrounding rocks during wall-rock alteration. Aluminum tends to be lower in high-temperature, high-silica water because it is used in the formation of clay minerals during wall-rock alteration at depth. Uranium is probably lower in high-temperature water because deeply circulating water commonly has a relatively low Eh, and uranium forms minerals that are insoluble in a reducing environment; alternatively, low-temperature water commonly has a relatively high Eh, and uranium forms bicarbonate and phosphate complexes that are soluble in an oxidizing environment. Nitrite and nitrate are probably lower in high-temperature water because deeply circulating water is less likely to contain organic species
31

that may be present as contaminants in low-temperature shallow-circulating water.
Some parameters in the factor 2 group have moderate secondary loadings on factor 1, duration of circulation. The concentration of fluoride tends to increase as salinity increases because the solubility of fluorite, as mentioned above, is affected by salinity as well as temperature. Aluminum, also, has higher concentrations in more saline water, probably because of the formation of aqueous complexes. Temperature is positively related to duration of circulation and Eh is negatively related because deeper circulating, hotter water is usually in contact with the rocks in the system longer than shallower circulating water containing dissolved atmospheric oxygen.
Factor 3, partial pressure of carbon dioxide, is strongly related to concentrations of species involved with carbonate equilibria. As carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and from the rocks in the hydrogeologic system becomes dissolved in the water, calcium and magnesium also go into solution. Barium and radium, as alkaline-earth elements, apparently behave similarly to calcium and magnesium, and the sulfate content of the water generally remains low enough that the concentrations of these elements are not controlled by barite solubility in most of the springs sampled.
This factor group contains the bicarbonate and carbonate ions and the alkaline-earth elements, but it also contains pH, which has a negative loading on this factor. As more carbon dioxide becomes dissolved in the water, the pH decreases. Therefore, spring waters containing abundant carbon dioxide, as noted by vigorous bubbling and travertine deposition, tend to have a relatively low pH. As the waters flow away from the orifice and lose carbon dioxide during travertine deposition, the pH rises, as noted by measurements
32

over about 100 m of flow at one tested spring (NV18). Although we did not test the gases released, other studies (for example, Scott and Barker, 1962) indicate that carbon dioxide is the most common and abundant gas in many travertine-depositing systems.
Most ions in the factor 3 group show moderate secondary loadings on other factors. Calcium and magnesium have negative loadings on factor 2, depth of circulation. This relationship is consistent with carbonate equilibria. Because the carbonate mineral solubilities are known to decrease with increasing temperature, the concentrations of calcium and magnesium tend to be higher in lower temperature, shallower circulating water than in higher temperature, deeper circulating water. Calcium, radium, and bicarbonate all have positive loadings on factor 1, duration of circulation. This relationship also reflects carbonate equilibria. The solubilities of minerals such as calcite increase with increasing salinity, or total ionic strength, of the water; therefore, the concentrations of calcium and bicarbonate tend to be greater in more saline water. Radium apparently shows a geochemical behavior similar to calcium because of its alkaline-earth identity.
The matrix of correlation coefficients shown in table 5 was used to subjectively evaluate relationships between the factor parameter groups and the parameters not used in the factor analysis. Most of the parameters not used in the factor analysis have significant positive correlations with the parameters in factor 1. Cobalt, copper, zinc, yttrium, and ytterbium correlate with numerous elements in factor 1, and chromium, rubidium, scandium, and phosphate correlate with several elements in factor 1. Germanium correlates with phosphate. Selenium correlates with sulfate. Beryllium correlates with several elements in factor 1 but also shows a
33

positive correlation with uranium in factor 2. Concentrations of all these elements tend to increase with increasing salinity. These elements are present in very small amounts because they are associated with minerals that are relatively insoluble in most near-surface environments but whose solubilities are increased by the presence of saline solutions and the formation of aqueous complexes.
Several parameters not used in the factor analysis have significant correlations with parameters in factor 2. Dissolved oxygen correlates with Eh, uranium, and nitrate-nitrite and is negative with temperature, fluoride, and silica; like Eh, it has negative correlations with several elements in factor 1. Arsenic has positive correlations with temperature, fluoride, and silica and negative correlations with Eh and nitrate-nitrite. Helium has a positive correlation with temperature and negative correlations with uranium and dissolved oxygen. Radon correlates with temperature, silica, fluoride, and arsenic but also with radium in factor 3. Lead is positive with temperature, silica, fluoride, arsenic, and radon and is negative with Eh and uranium. Concentrations of these elements are apparently affected by variations in temperature and oxidation-reduction potential. The correlations shown by dissolved oxygen are particularly noteworthy and indicate that the abundance of dissolved oxygen is a very important influence on Eh measurements, as expected. Radon and helium are both gases, and their relative abundance in hot water may reflect increased solubility in water which has circulated deeply and been under increased pressure.
Only one of the omitted parameters has a significant correlation with parameters in factor 3. Radium-228 has a positive correlation with radium (primarily radium-226), as might be expected for isotopes of the same
34

element. Three other omitted elements--silver, nickel, and gallium--have significant correlations with parameters in one of the factor groups, but scatter diagrams indicated that these correlations are unduly influenced by extreme values.
Factor scores were computed in order to evaluate the influence of the identified factors on each sample used in the factor analysis. Because uranium mineralization was not one of the identified factors, factor scores do not provide direct information on the relationship between particular springs and possible mineralization; however, factor scores do quantify the influence of the identified hydrogeologic environmental factors on individual springs, and this information can then be used in conjunction with anomalous radioactivity data in evaluating the springs.
Factor scores were determined by multiplying the data matrix by the varimax factor matrix. The results are shown in standardized form (table 8); a zero in the column indicates an average influence of that factor on the sample, a high positive score indicates a high intensity of that factor, and a high negative score indicates a low intensity. Positive scores on factor 1 indicate relatively old waters, positive scores on factor 2 indicate relatively deep waters, and positive scores on factor 3 indicate relatively carbonated waters.
The samples show every combination of positive and negative factor scores for the three factors. The distribution of positive and negative scores for each sample indicates that most of the samples fall into two broad categories of water, as shown by positive or negative scores on factors 1 and 2 (table 8): (1) older, deeper circulating water, and (2) younger, shallower circulating water. The first type of water is characterized by relatively
35

high salinity, high temperature, and low Eh, and the second type is characterized by relatively low salinity, low temperature, and high Eh. Either type can be influenced by partial pressure of carbon dioxide, resulting in a relatively low or high pH, as shown by the positive or negative scores on factor 3. The rest of the samples fall into two other groups nominal ly, older, shallower circulating water and younger, deeper circulating water as shown by positive scores on factor 1 and negative scores on factor 2, or visa versa. These waters are characterized by relatively high salinity, low temperature, and high Eh or by relatively low salinity, high temperature, and low Eh. Again, either type can be influenced by relatively high or low partial pressure of carbon dioxide.
The common occurrence of the first two types of water older, deeper water and younger, shallower water is consistent with current concepts of water circulation in most hydrogeologic systems. The occurrence of the last two types of water older, shallower water and younger, deeper water-testifies to the complexity of some hydrogeologic systems. Salinity generally increases with time, but high salinity can be attained in less time if the rocks contain abundant salts of high solubility or if the rocks have a porous and permeable texture allowing maximum contact of water with the surface area of the mineral grains. Temperature normally increases with depth, but high temperatures can be acquired at a relatively shallow depth if the geothermal gradient is abnormally high due to the presence of a magma body at shallow depth. High temperatures acquired at depth are best preserved by rapid rise of the water to the surface along fault systems; however, heat can be lost by a slow rise to the surface or by mixing with cooler water. These variations in the hydrogeologic systems can result in saline waters of abnormally low
36

temperature, cool waters of abnormally high salinity, fresh waters of abnormally high temperature, and hot waters of abnormally low salinity. Waters designated "older, shallower" or "younger, deeper" may, therefore, be "older, deeper" or "younger, shallower" waters from complex systems showing abnormally high or low temperature or salinity.
Uranium or radium concentrations can be high in any of the identified types of water, and the variance in uranium and radium values is another indication of the complexity of some hydrogeologic systems. The three identified factors (table 7) account for 60 percent of the variance in uranium values and 71 percent of the variance in radium values, as shown by the communality. The remaining 30 to 40 percent of the variance is unexplained. Uranium concentrations tend to be higher in waters of relatively low temperature and high Eh, and radium concentrations tend to be higher in waters having relatively high amounts of dissolved carbonate species (low pH) and, secondarily, relatively high salinity. Thus, radium and uranium concentrations vary with the three identified factors, but they also vary with unidentified factors such as the composition of common rocks in the systems. Radium and uranium concentrations can be abnormally high in the vicinity of uranium-rich rocks.
The occurrence of anomalous radioactivity in the springs may still be the best indicator of uranium-rich rocks, whether they are in simple or complex hydrogeologic systems. Some of the samples having anomalous radioactiveelement concentrations occur in the first two categories of water shown in table 8 (MT4, NV28, NV29, UT9A, UT10); these samples may reflect variations in relatively simple hydrogeologic systems. Alhambra warm well (MT4) and Grant View hot springs (NV29), as discussed earlier, are in areas of known uranium
37

occurrences in fractured granitic rocks. Other samples having anomalous radioactive-element concentrations occur in the other categories (C014, C015, NV18, and UT19); these samples may reflect variations in more complex systems and may, therefore, be particularly good indicators of uranium-rich rocks in more varied geologic terranes. As discussed earlier, Wildhorse Spring (UT19) is in the Spor Mountain mining district, and Yellow Soda Spring (C014) and Taylor Soda Spring (C015) are near the Tallahassee Creek uranium district. These springs are not known to be directly associated with particular deposits, but their identification here as anamously radioactive complex spring systems makes a direct association feasible. Monte Neva Hot Springs (NV18), also discussed earlier, is not known to be associated with nearby uranium occurrences, but its identification with this group of springs make it of primary interest for uranium exploration.
38

Conclusion Multivan ate statistical analyses indicate that three major factors affect water composition in the spring systems studied: (1) duration of water circulation, (2) depth of water circulation, and (3) partial pressure of carbon dioxide. An examination of factor scores indicates that several types of hydrogeologic systems were sampled. Most of the samples are from simple hydrogeologic systems involving (1) older, deeper circulating water having relatively high salinity, high temperature, and low Eh or (2) younger, shallower circulating water having relatively low salinity, low temperature, and high Eh. The rest of the samples are probably from complex hydrogeologic systems involving older, deeper water or younger, shallower water having abnormally high or low salinity or temperature. Any of the systems can have a relatively high or low content of dissolved carbonate species, resulting in a low or high pH, respectively. Uranium concentrations are commonly higher in waters of relatively low temperature and high Eh, and radium concentrations are commonly higher in waters having a relatively high carbonate content (low pH) and, secondarily, relatively high salinity. The statistical variance in radium and uranium concentrations unaccounted for by the identified factors also testifies to the complexity of some hydrogeologic systems. Unidentified factors related to geologic setting and the presence of uranium-rich rocks in the systems also affect the observed concentrations of the radioactive elements in the water. The association of anomalous radioactivity in several springs with nearby known uranium occurrences indicates that other springs having anomalous radioactivity may also be associated with uranium occurrences as yet undiscovered. Anomalously radioactive springs associated with known occurrences are Taylor Soda Spring
39

(C015) and Yellow Soda Spring (C014); Alhambra Hot Springs (MT3) and warm well (MT4); Wildhorse Spring (UT19); Grant View Hot Springs (NV29); and Soda Dam Hot Springs (NM1). Springs having anomalous radioactivity but not associated with known occurrences are Monte Neva Hot Springs (NV18); the spring in Nye Canyon (NV28); Crystal Springs (UT5B), Stinking Hot Springs (UT9A), and Utah Hot Springs (UT10); Washakie Mineral Hot Springs (WY8); and Faywood Hot Springs (NM5).
40

References
Baker, C. H., Jr., 1968, Thermal springs near Midway, Utah, in Geological Survey research 1968: U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 600-D, p. 63-70.
Barrett, J. K., and Pearl, R. H., 1976, Hydrogeological data of thermal springs and wells in Colorado: Colorado Geol. Survey Inf. Series 6, 124 P-
Bass, N. W., and Northrop, S. A., 1963, Geology of Glenwood Springs quadrangle and vicinity, northwestern Colorado: U.S. Geol. Survey Bull. 1142-J, 74 P-
Bjorklund, L. J., and McGreevy, L. J., 1974, Gound-water resources of the lower Bear River drainage basin, Box Elder County, Utah: Utah Dept. Natural Resources Tech. Pub. 44, 65 p.
Boltwood, B. B., 1905, On the radioactive properties of the waters of the springs on the Hot Springs Reservation, Hot Springs, Arkansas: Am. Jour. Science, 4th Ser., v. 20, p. 128-132.
Cadigan, R. A., Felmlee, J. K., and Rosholt, J. N., 1976, Radioactive mineral springs in Delta County, Colorado: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 76-223, 39 p.
Carlson, J. E., Stewart, J. H., Johannesen, Dann, and Kleinhampl, F. J., 1978, Preliminary geologic map of the Walker Lake 1° by 2° quadrangle: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 78-523, 1 sheet.
Chadwick, R. A., and Kaczmarek, M. B., 1975, Geothermal investigations of selected Montana hot springs, in Energy resources of Montana: Montana Geol. Survey 22d Ann. Pub., p. 209-216.
Dane, C. H., and Bachman, G. 0., 1965, Geologic map of New Mexico: U.S. Geol. Survey, scale 1:500,000, 2 sheets.
41

Ellis, A. J., 1970, Quantitative interpretation of chemical characteristics of hydrothermal systems: Geothermics, Spec. Issue 2, p. 516-528.
____1979, Explored geothermal systems, jn_ Barnes, H. L., ed., Geochemistry of hydrothermal ore deposits, Second edition: New York, John Wiley and Sons, p. 632-683.
Epis, R. C., Wobus, R. A., and Scott, G. R., 1979, Preliminary geologic map of the Black Mountain quadrangle, Fremont and Park Counties, Colorado: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 79-652, 12 p.
Feth, J. H., 1954, Preliminary report of investigations of springs in the Mogollon Rim region, Arizona, with sections on Base flow of streams, by N. D. White, and Quality of water, by J. D. Hem: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept., 77 p.
Feth, J. H., and Barnes, Ivan, 1979, Spring-deposited travertine in eleven Western States: U.S. Geol. Survey Water-Resources Inv. Open-File Rept. 79-35, 1 sheet.
Fournier, R. 0., White, D. E., and Truesdell, A. H., 1974, Geothermal indicators of subsurface temperature--Part 1, Basic assumptions: Jour. Research U.S. Geol. Survey, v. 2, no. 3, p. 259-262.
Gary, Margaret, McAfee, Robert, Jr., and Wolf, Carol, eds., 1974, Glossary of geology, with a forward by lan Campbell: Falls Church, VA, Am. Geol. Inst., 805 p.
Hall, F. R., 1963, Springs in the vicinity of Socorro, New Mexico: New Mexico Geol. Soc. Guidebook, 14th Field Conf., Socorro Region, p. 160-179.
Heinrich, E. W., and Bever, J. E., 1957, Radioactive mineral occurrences in the Guffey area, Park and Fremont Counties, Colorado: Colorado School Mines Quart., v. 52, no. 4, p. 23-35.
42

Hem, J. D., 1970, Study and interpretation of the chemical characteristics of natural water: U.S. Geol. Survey Water-Supply Paper 1473, 363 p.
Holland, H. D., and Malinin, S. D., 1979, The solubility and occurrence of non-ore minerals, j_n_ Barnes, H. L., ed., Geochemistry of hydrothermal ore deposits, Second edition: New York, John Wiley and Sons, p. 461-508.
Leonard, R. B., and Janzer, V. J., 1977, Natural radioactivity in geothermal waters, Alharnbra Hot Springs and nearby areas, Jefferson County, Montana: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 77-624, 20 p.; U.S. Geol. Survey Jour. Research, 1978, v. 6, no. 4, p. 529-540.
Lindsey, D. A., 1979, Tertiary volcanism and uranium mineralization in the Thomas Range and northern Drum Mountains, Juab County, Utah: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 79-1976, 141 p.
Mallory, E. C., Jr., and Barnett, P. R., 1973, Chemical and spectrochemical analyses of selected ground water in Colorado: U.S. Geol. Survey OpenFile Rept., 47 p.
Mariner, R. H., Presser, T. S., and Evans, W. C., 1976, Chemical characteristics of the major thermal springs of Montana: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 76-480, 30 p.
____1977, Chemical, isotopic, and gas compositions of selected thermal springs in Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 77-654, 42 p.
Mifflin, M. D., 1968, Delineation of ground-water flow systems in Nevada: Univ. Nevada, Center for Water Resources Research, Desert Research Inst., Tech. Rept. Ser. H-W, Pub. No. 4, 111 p.
Mundorff, J. C., 1970, Major thermal springs of Utah: Utah Geol. and Mineral Survey Water Resources Bull. 13, 60 p.
43

1971, Nonthermal springs of Utah: Utah Geol. and Mineral. Survey Water Resources Bull. 16, 70 p. Nowak, Gregory, 1979, The geology and uranium occurrences of the Washington mining district, Lyon County, Nevada: Univ. Nevada, M.S. thesis, 92 p. O'Connell, M. F., and Kaufmann, R. F., 1976, Radioactivity associated with geothermal waters in the Western United States Basic Data: Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Radiation Programs, Tech. Note ORP/LV-75-8A, 25 p. Peterson, J. E., Buell, S. E., Cadigan, R. A., Felmlee, J. K., and Spirakas, C. S., 1977, Uranium, radium, and selected metallic-element analyses of spring water and travertine samples from the Grand Canyon, Arizona: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 77-36, 8 p. Reimer, G. M., 1977, Fixed volume gas inlet system for an alpha-sensitive cell adapted for radon measurement: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-File Rept. 77-409, 3 P. Roberts, W. A., and Gude, A. J., 3d, 1953, Uranium-bearing deposits west of Clancy, Jefferson County, Montana: U.S. Geol. Survey Bull. 988-F, p. 69-87. Sanders, J. W., and Miles, M. J., 1974, Mineral content of selected geothermal waters: Univ. Nevada, Desert Research Inst., Center of Water Resources Research Proj. Rept. 26, 36 p. Schlundt, Herman, and Moore, R. B., 1909, Radioactivity of the thermal waters of Yellowstone National Park: U.S. Geol. Survey Bull. 395, 35 p. Scott, R. C., and Barker, F. B., 1962, Data on uranium and radium in ground water in the United States, 1954 to 1957: U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 426, 115 p.
44

Scott, R. C., and Voegeli, P. T., Sr., 1961, Radiochemical analyses of ground and surface water in Colorado, 1954-1961: Colorado Water Conservation Board Basic-Data Rept. 7, 27 p.
Sorensen, M. L., and Crittenden, M. D., Jr., 1972, Geologic map of part of the Wasatch Range near North Ogden, Utah: U.S. Geol. Survey Misc. Field Studies Map MF-428, 1 sheet.
Staatz, M. H., and Bauer, H. L., Jr., 1953, Uranium in the East Walker River area, Lyon County, Nevada: U.S. Geol. Survey Bull. 988-C, p. 29-43.
Staatz, M. H., and Cam, W. J., 1964, Geology and mineral deposits of the Thomas and Dugway Ranges, Juab and Tooele Counties, Utah: U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 415, 188 p.
Stewart, J. H., and Carlson, J. E., 1974, Preliminary geologic map of Nevada: U.S. Geol. Survey Misc. Field Studies Map MF-609, 4 sheets.
Thatcher, L. L., Janzer, V. J., and Edwards, K. W., 1977, Methods for determination of radioactive substances in water and fluvial sediments: Techniques of Water-Resources Investigations of the U.S. Geol. Survey, Book 5, Chap. A5, 95 p.
Whitcomb, H. A., and Lowry, M. E., 1968, Ground-water resources and geology of the Wind River basin area, central Wyoming: U.S. Geol. Survey Hydro!. Inv. Atlas HA-270, 13 p.
White, D. E., Hem, J. D., and Waring, G. A., 1963, Chemical composition of subsurface waters: U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 440-F, 67 p.
Wollenberg, H. A., 1974, Radioactivity of Nevada hot-spring systems: Geophys. Research Letters, v. 1, no. 8, p. 359-362.
Young, H. W., and Mitchell, J. C., 1973, Geochemistry and geologic settings of selected thermal waters, in Geothermal investigations in Idaho: Idaho Dept. Water Administration, Water Inf. Bull. 30, Part 1, 43 p.
45

]» 2 . 3,4«

MONTANA

WYOMING COLORADO
11,12 1..2

Figure 1.--Mineral-spring sites visited during this study. Numbers in each state correspond to sites described in table 1

Water sample locality
Locality visited but not sampled for water

MONTANA
WY~O_MING
COLORADO

Figure 2.--Water sample localities. Number shows number of sites represented by a dot where more than one site cannot be be shown at this scale.
47

Radium (pCi/L)

MONTANA
WYOMING OLORADO

Figure 3.--Radium concentrations in water. Where more than one sample is represented by a point, only the highest value is shown
48

Radium-228 (pCi/L)

MONTANA
WYOMING COLORADO

Figure 4.--Radium-228 concentrations in water.

Uranium (yg/L)

MONTANA

WYOMING COLORADO

Figure 5.--Uranium concentrations in water. Where more than one sample is represented by a point, only the highest value is shown

Radon (pCi/L)
<10 10-100 100-1000 1000-10,000 A 10,000-100,000 100,000

MONTANA
WYOMING COLORADO

Figure 6.--Radon concentrations in water. Where more than one sample is represented by a point, only the highest value is shown
51

Helium (ppb)
-10,000 to -1000 ° -1000 to 0
0-1000 1000-10,000 >10,000

MONTANA
WYOMING COLORADO

Figure 7.--Helium concentrations in water. 52

MT3_, Rn

MONTANA MT4 Rn Ra/spc

WYOMING COLORADO

Figure 8.--Water sample localities showing anomalous radioactivety Underline indicates presence of nearby known uranium occurrences.
53

CaSO,

« Ca CATIONS

Cl + N0 3 + F ANIONS
PERCENTAGE IN EQUIVALENTS PER MILLION

Figure 9.--Major-ion chemistry of sampled waters, showing common water types. Small numbers referring to sample points indicate number of additional samples which plot in the same place as a sample already plotted.

54

Table 1.--Sample site descriptions [W, water sample and (or) field measurements; S, precipitate or sediment sample.]

Site Site name No.
A2 1 Vaseys Paradise spring 1n Grand Canyon
AZ 2 Grand Canyon at river mile 34.1
AZ 3 Spring 1n Grand Canyon at river mile 34.2
AZ 4 Grand Canyon at river mile 136.7
AZ 5 Spring 1n Grand Canyon at river mile 151.5
AZ 6 Spring In Grand Canyon at river mile 147.9
AZ 7 Grand Canyon at river mile 155.8
AZ 8 Havasu Canyon 1n Grand Canyon
AZ 9 Spring at Fern Glen Canyon 1n Grand Canyon
AZ10 Grand Canyon at river mile 114.5
AZ11 Grand Canyon at river mile 115.5
AZ12 Grand Canyon at river mile 116.5
AZ13 Lava Falls warm springs in Grand Canyon
AZ14 Pumpkin Spring 1n Grand Canyon
AZ15 Grand Canyon at river mile 77
AZ16 The Salt Banks springs
AZ17 Clifton Hot Spring
AZ18 Indian Hot Springs
CA 1 Grovers Hot Springs
CA 2 Mild Horse Spring
CA 3 Lava Springs
CA 4 Fales Hot Springs
CA 5 Travertine Hot Springs at Bridgeport
CA 6 Spring on Big Alkali Flat in Bodie Hills
CA 7 Warm spring in Bodie Hills
CA 8 Sulphur artesian well at Mono Lake
CA 9 Hot spring at Mono Lake
CA10 Warm springs at Mono Lake

Sample type

Arizona

Remarks

W Spring issues on right bank of river facing downstream. Sampled at point of Issue.
S No spring. Travertine forms stalactite-like mass on rock outcrop on right bank of river facing downstream.
W Springs issue 1n several places from rock outcrop on right bank of river facing downstream. Sampled from several points of issue.
S No spring. Damp travertine at base of outcrop on left bank of river facing downstream.
H S Spring Issues from rock outcrop on right bank of river facing downstream. Sampled at point of Issue. Travertine has formed.
U S Spring issues from rock outcrop on right bank of river facing downstream. Sampled at point of Issue. Travertine has formed.
S Water seeps from rock ledge on right bank of river facing downstream. Travertine has formed near point of Issue.
S Spring issues far upstream. Travertine has formed 1n creek bed to at least 400 m from mouth of creek on left bank of river facing downstream.
W S Springs issue from rock outcrops on rignt bank of river facing downstream. Sampled at main (lowest) spring. Travertine forms deposits.
S No spring. Damp travertine coats rocks on left bank of river facing downstream.
S No spring. Travertine coating on float boulder on left bank of river facing downstream.
S No spring. Travertine coating on float boulder at mouth of creek on left bank of river facing downstream.
W S Springs issue over length of several hundred meters on left bank of river facing downstream. Sampled at several points of issue. Travertine forms deposits at several sites.
W S Spring Issues in pool on travertine mound and flows out to river at upstream end of pool on left bank of river facing downstream. Sampled
at pool. Travertine 1s forming around spring. S No water. Inactive travertine at dry spring on left bank of river
facing downstream. W S Springs issue in three areas on north side of river along river bank.
Sampled at easternmost spring area near river level, where water flows from older deposits. Extensive cliff-like travertine apron covers river bank for about 0.5 km. Deposits are actively forming where water rises 1n pools and overflows down apron as much as 30 m to river. W Springs seep from gravel 1n numerous places at river level on east bank of river. Sampled at one point of Issue of high temperature. W Springs Issue 1n pools behind hotel building of old spa. Sampled at one pool. Water used for bathing.
California

W S Springs issue 1n numerous orifices near base of hillside. Sampled at main spring, which forms 1-m-diameter pool at crest of low travertine mound at west end of spring area. Travertine forms apron in areas where springs issue. Water used for swimming pool. State Park.
W Spring issues through horizontal metal pipe at least 1 m long. Sampled
where water flows from pipe. Hater used for stock. W Spring rises near base of outcrop at bend in road. Sampled at point of
issue. W S Spring rises 1n 3-m-diameter pool with vigorous bubbling of large-volume
flow on south side of highway. Sampled at pool edge. Water flows down valley to west, where travertine is forming in places along the drainage. North of highway is large inactive travertine mound with 20-m-diameter circular depression at crest, about 30 m above level of present spring discharge. Hater used for swimming pool. W S Springs Issue in large area on hillside. Sampled at main spring at highest level of spring area, where water rises in 0.5-m-diameter cement cylinder. Extensive aprons and ridges of inactive travertine
cover the area. Fresh travertine is forming at current orifices.
Travertine has been mined for stone. W Spring rises 1n shallow pond about 10 m diameter. Sampled at edge of
pond. W Spring rises near base of low hill and forms marshy pond. Sampled near
point of Issue at north edge of pond. W Water rises through metal pipe about 10 cm diameter and flows out at W ground level. Sampled at point of issue. H 2 S smell. W S Spring rises underground and flows about 100 m north through 15-cm-
diameter metal pipe to 1-m-long cement-walled rectangular pool. Vertical vent pipe near source allows escape of steam. Sampled where water flows Into pool from pipe. Fresh travertine is forming at water level around edge of pool. Spring rises 1n sandy 0.3-m-d1ameter pool east of Mono Lake. Sampled at point of Issue.

55

Table 1.--Sample site descr1pt1ons--Cont1nued

Site No.

Site name

Sample type

Colorado

Remarks

CO 1 Sulphur Springs near Kremmllng
CO 2 Hot Sulphur Springs
CO 3 Glenwood Springs
CO 4 Sulphur Springs at Sulphur Mountain
CO 5 Hartsel Hot Springs

WS WS WS
WS WS

CO 6 Salt Spring near Antero
CO 7 Salt Works spring near Antero
CO 8 Colonel Chlnn artesian well
CO 9 Sulphur Gulch spring
C010 Austin springs

W WS
W WS WS

C011 Fish hatchery adit spring

WS

C012 Doughty springs (A, Bathtub spring; B, Alum spring)

WS

C013 Alum Gulch C014 Yellow Soda Spring
near Guffey C015 Taylor Soda Spring
C016 Waunlta Hot Springs
C017 poncha Hot Springs

S WS WS
WS

C018 Spring near Powderhorn C019 Mineral Hot Springs

S WS

C020 Lower Red Creek soda springs C021 Orvls Hot Spring C022 Ouray hot springs

S W WS

C023 Ophlr Iron Spring

Springs Issue 1n numerous places on west-facing slope. Sampled at main spring by road 1n gulley to north of other springs. H£S smell.
Springs Issue In several places on hillside behind motel. Main spring Is piped underground to motel. Sampled at spring of smaller flow. Some precipitates are forming 1n drainage. H£$ smell.
Springs Issue at several places along river. Main spring that feeds swimming pool rises 1n circular 10-m-dlameter cement-walled pool with vigorous bubbling of large-volume flow. Sampled at outlet from main spring. Precipitates have formed at pool edges.
Springs seep from ground on south side of hill. Sampled at one place where bubbles rise with water. Water used for stock. Sample PAR 1 of Mallory and Barnett (1973).
Springs Issue In several places at base of hill south of Hartsel. Sampled inside small wooden bathhouse near large building, where water rises In pool about 0.5 m diameter. Water used for bathing. Sample PAR 5 of Mallory and Barnett (1973).
Springs Issue from base of low slope east of road and flow east. Sampled near point of issue. Sample PAR 2 of Mallory and Barnett (1973).
Spring issues from pipe next to old salt works building. Sampled at point of issue. Water used for stock. Sample PAR 3 of Mallory and Barnett
(1973). Water flows from valved wellhead on terrace south of river. Sampled at
wellhead. HoS smell. Springs Issue in three 2- to 3-m-diameter pools 1n rock outcrops In lower
end of gulley. Sampled at edge of middle pool. HgS smell. Several springs Issue near base of hill or in gulleys on hillside.
Sampled northermost spring which rises at base of outcrop 1n pool 0.5 m diameter. Travertine shelf and apron are present farther south toward
river. H£S smell. Spring issues 1n dugout "adit" about 2 m high and 3 m deep In hillside
on north side of road. Sampled at entrance to "adit" at edge of pool. Soil bank at edge of road contains travertine-cemented talus.
HoS smell. Springs issue at base of rock outcrops on north side of river. Travertine
forms snelf 300 m long by 30 m wide between outcrops and river. Sampled one spring at east end of shelf which rises 1n small 0.5-m-diameter pool and flows into largest blue pool on shelf; also sampled spring at west end of shelf which flows from rock crevice and into black pool. Travertine Is forming along drainages and at shelf edge. H^S smell. Water seeps from outcrops on west side of gulley. Alum deposits have formed on underside of overhanging ledges. Alum has been mined. Springs issue 1n pools on travertine mound on hillside. Sampled at point of issue of main 2-m-diameter pool at crest of mound. Precipitate 1s forming at present orifice. Sample PAR 4 of Mallory and Barnett (1973). Springs issue in large area about 100 by 500 m at base of hill. Sampled at spring at southwest edge of area. Travertine mounds up to 0.5 m high surrounded some of the orifices. Precipitate Is forming in some springs. Sample FRE 1 of Mallory and Barnett (1973). Springs issue at base of nlll near resort and also along south side of creek several hundred meters to northwest. Tested where water Issues from underneath small building in highest part of spring area along
creek. Springs Issue at several places on steep slope. Sampled at No. 13 where
water rises in 0.5-m-square cement-walled orifice. Inactive travertine forms numerous mounds on slope. Sample CHA 6 of Mallory and Barnett (1973). Water from springs flows underground through pipes to reservoir
and then to town of Poncha Springs. Springs issue at several places on southwest side of valley. Inactive
travertine forms two aprons about 200 by 400 m on northeast side of
road west of Cebolla Hot Springs. Springs Issue 1n several places on or near broad mounds on valley floor.
Tested at flowing well in northeast part of spring area. Mounds are inactive travertine. Sample similar to SAG 4 of Mallory and Barnett
(1973). No water. Two 3-m-high mounds having 1-m-dimeter depressions in crests
are present 1n 50-square-m area of Inactive travertine. Spring issues at bottom of circular depression on top of Inactive
travertine shelf. Sampled at edge of pool. Springs issue on hillside behind motel about 15 m up slope and also 1n
cave on river bank about 5 m above river level several hundred meters west of motel. Sampled at point of Issue behind motel, where water rises In covered pool about 1 m square. Inactive travertine forms large apron below point of Issue. Water used for hot tubs and for
municipal swimming pool. Spring Issues from dugout adit. Tested at point of Issue. Iron-rich
travertine forms deposits near spring and at base of hill. Travertine
has been mined.

56

Table 1.--Sample site descriptions Continued

Site

Site name

Sample

No. type

Remarks

Colorado Continued

C024 Dunton Hot Springs C025 Wagon Wheel Gap hot springs

WS W

C026 Sulphur Springs near La Veta
C027 Bakers Bridge hot springs near Durango
C028 Pagosa Springs

W WS
S

Spring Issues near base of hill. Tested at point of Issue. Travertine forms thin depoit near spring, below bathouse.
Springs issue in two places, one near old spa building and one upstream, or south, from building. Tested at northern spring. Sample MIN 2 of Mallory and Barnett (1973). Water used for bathing.
Springs issue 1n two places at base of outcrop, one 15 m upstream, or west, from other. Tested at eastern spring. Sample HUE 5 of Mallory and Barnett (1973). HnS smell.
Springs Issue on east side of highway 1n large pond and on west side of highway about 50 m up hillside. Sampled at edge of large pond. Travertine froms large apron below springs on hillside west of highway.
Springs Issue near motel and along south bank of river. Precipitates are forming around orifices and along drainages. f^S smell.
Idaho

ID 1 Helse Hot Springs

W S Spring Issues on hillside about 10 m above river on north side of river

and south of road. Point of Issue 1s enclosed 1n cement structure.

Sampled at leak 1n pipe 7 m from source. Travertine 1s forming where

water leaks from pipe. Water used for swimming pool. ^2$ smell.

10 2 Fall Creek Mineral Springs W S Springs Issue on south bank of Fall Creek. Sampled at point of Issue of

main spring, where travertine apron 1s actively forming. Inactive

travertine mounds occur downstream.

ID 3 Soda Springs artesian

W S Water gushes horizontally out of pipe extending about 7 m from cement

building presumably over source. Sampled at end of pipe. Building

is on flank of large travertine mound about 15 m high. Fresh travertine

1s forming where water falls on mound.

ID 4 Lava Hot Springs

W Springs issue at base of cliff. Sampled at point of issue. Inactive

travertine coats cliff and forms grotto-like deposits nearby. Water

used for swimming pool.

ID 5 Pleasantvlew Warm Springs

W

Spring Issues 1n broad area, seeping out of gravel at pond edges. Sampled

at one point of Issue.

ID 6 Spring

W S Confidential.

Montana

MT 1 Broadwater hot well
MT 2 White Sulphur Springs MT 3 Alnambra Hot Springs
MT 4 Alnambra warm well MT 5 Boulder Hot Springs
MT 6 Warm Springs at State Hospital
MT 7 Gregson Hot Springs
MT 8 Pipestone Hot Springs MT 9 Silver Star hot springs MT10 Norrls Hot Springs MT11 Blltmore Hot Springs MT12 Elkhorn Hot Springs MT13 Jardlne Hot Spring
near Jackson

U S Water Issues 1n seeps and has been tapped by wells. Sampled at 10-cmdiameter wellhead 1 m above ground. Water had to be pumped out from about 1 m depth because 1t was not flowing. Being developed for geotnermal energy. f^S smell at one steam vent.
W Water Issues from 0.3-m-dlameter pipe 1n soil bank. Sampled at pipe. Pinkish white precipitates form thin coatings on pebbles where water
flows to west. H£S smell. W S Springs Issue 1n cement-walled covered orifices. Sampled at upper end
of main orifice near gazebo. Edge of travertine shelf crops out about 5 m north of springs. Some spring water Issues from pipe and 1s now forming travertine on the shelf slope. W Uater issues from pipe about 1 m above ground. Sampled at pipe. W S Main spring Issues in 3-m-diameter cement tank on hillside behind hotel. Sampled at end of 5-m-long pipe extending from side of tank. Some encrustations have formed on pipe. Other smaller springs Issue farther
up hillside. Water used for swimming pool. W S Spring issues at top of large travertine mound which stands about 15 m
above valley floor. Sampled at outlet pipe at base of gazebo on top of mound, wnere water is now forming travertine as it flows down the slope
of the mound. W Springs issue 1n tanks covered by wooden pyramidal roofs. Sampled in
cement-walled and covered cylindrical 2-m-diameter collecting tank a few meters east of springs. Water was taken from the north one of the two pipes on the west side of the tank as it emptied into the tank.
H2$ smell. Water used for swimming pool. W Water Issues from l-m-h1gn 5-cm-diameter vertical pipe at south side of
creek, several meters southwest of gazebo. Sampled at pipe. W Springs issue 1n walled and grated orifices on gentle hillside. Sampled
at main spring Issuing 1n 1-m-square cement-walled pool. Water used
for swimming pool. W Spring issues from 3-m-h1gh vertical pipe at edge of swimming pool on
north side of valley. Sampled at pool edge. Other springs issue on the
south side of the valley in a reedy area. W S Water 1s tapped by 8-m-deep well. Sampled at spigot attached to well
casing. Travertine encrustations coat drainage area near well. Water
used for swimming pool . W Springs Issue 1n fenced grassy area 1n valley. Sampled at uppermost
spring where 1t Issues Into a small natural catchment basin 1n outcrop. Water used for swimming pool. W Spring Issues 1n 4-m-square cement-walled pool with vigorous bubbling of large-volume flow on slight rise in valley floor. Sampled at pool edge.

57

Table 1.--Sample site descriptions Continued

Site

Site name

Sample

No. type

Remarks

Montana Contlnued

MT14 La Duke Hot Spring

W S Spring Issues In long cement-walled covered orifice along east side of highway at base of Mil. Sampled at outlet pipe on west side of highway, where water gushes out and 1s forming a travertine apron. Radon sample was taken at small-flow spring Issuing from gravel slope south of main cement-walled orifice on east side of highway.

Nevada

NV 1 Baltazor Hot Spring

NV 2 Virgin Valley Warm Spring NV 3 Howard Hot Spring

U W

NV 4 Hot springs near Wells
NV 5 Tnreemlle Sulphur Spring
NV 6 Golconda Hot Spring (A. main spring; B, smaller spring)

S WS WS

NV 7 Plank Spring
NV 8 Brooks Hot Spring
NV 9 Great Boiling Spring at Gerlach
NV10 Sulphur Hot Springs in Ruby Valley
NV11 The Geysers at Beowawe

W W W
WS WS

NV12 Kyle Hot Springs

WS

NV13 Hot Spring Point not spring NV14 Buffalo Valley Hot Springs

W WS

NV15 Sou Hot Springs

WS

NV16 Collar and Elbow spring

W

NV17 Borchert John spring

W

NV18 Monte Neva Hot Springs

WS

NV19 Bartlne Hot Springs NV20 Steptoe warm springs NV21 Mcdll Spring NV22 Spencer Hot Springs NV23 Lackawanna Springs NV24 Rawhide hot spring

WS
W WS W

Springs issue on valley floor. Largest one forms 4-m-d1ameter pool 1n grassy area. Sampled at spring 30 m east of house, where 1t rises 1n 0.5-m-diameter metal cylinder set 1n ground.
Spring Issues 1n pool near base of Mil. Sampled at pool outlet. Springs Issue 1n several places on gentle slope. Sampled at main spring
on southwest side of area, where water forms pools several meters
diameter. Springs Issue 1n large area on hillside. Travertine forms extensive
apron. Spring issues from crevice 1n rock outcrop and forms pool. Sampled at
point of Issue. H2$ smell. Springs Issue in large area. Sampled where water pours from ground at
outlet from highest level pool 1n northeast part of area. Three pools here are 5 to 6 m diameter and are rimmed witn travertine. Also sampled in ig77 was small pool 1n west part of area near radioactive
spot. Travertine has been mined for Mn. Spring issues 1n 1-m-square cement-walled pool. Sampled in pool 1n
1977. Spring dry 1n 1980. Spring issues in depression on valley floor about 5 m diameter. Sampled
at point of issue at south edge of spring pool. Springs issue 1n numerous places 1n broad area. Sampled at edge of main
spring near parking area where 1t rises 1n pool about 10 m diameter with
vigorous bubbling of large-volume flow. Springs issue in numerous places on valley floor. Sampled at hottest
spring tested, wtiich rises 1n 2-m-diameter pool. H£S smell.
Springs issue on terrace several hundred meters long on nortn slope of hill. At least two wells tap water. Main stream of water roars vertically about 15 m Into air. Sampled at pipe about 30 m east of main spout, where water comes out witn less force. Terrace 1s formed by travertine. New deposits are forming around pipes.
Springs Issue 1n several places on low mound about 50 m across. Sampled at hottest spring at point of Issue 1n depression 1.5 m below surface. Low mound has about 5 m relief and 1s composed of Inactive travertine.
HoS smell. Water used for bathing. Spring Issues about 100 m northwest of rock quarry on hillside. Sampled
where spring rises Into l-m-d1ameter pool. Springs Issue at many points over broad area of valley floor. Sampled at
one spring with enougn flow to use. Small travertine cones up to 0.7 m high surround many springs. Water used for stock. Springs Issue at several places near base of hill. Sampled at outlet of spring of largest flow most accessible between two travertine mounds. Two broad Inactive travertine mounds are about 5 m high. Spring issues at base of grass-covered low mound on valley floor. Water
forms shallow pool with no obvious point source. Sampled at edge of
pool. Spring Issues from bank of alluvium and flows northeast about 50 m into
cement-walled pool which feeds Into 10-cm-diameter pipe leading toward valley floor. Sampled at cement-walled pool. Spring Issues from cut in large travertine mound several hundred meters
diameter. Sampled at point of Issue 1n cut 2 m below crest of mound. Fresh travertine 1s forming along edge of drainage where water
flows out to west and north. Faint H£S smell. Springs Issue in two places. Sampled larger spring, which rises through
I0-cm-d1ameter pipe Into 1-m-square cement-walled pool. Inactive
travertine forms mounds about 1 m high 1n area. Springs Issue 1n several places along gentle slope and feed a collecting
pond. Sampled at spring that Issues at southwest side of pond and flows
20 m to the pond. Water used for Irrigation. Spring Issues from 0.5-m-d1ameter pipe 1n ground Into large pond used for
swimming. Sampled at pipe. Springs issue on top of large broad apron. Sampled at one point of Issue
where water rises near metal pipe in pool about 1 m diameter. Apron 1s
inactive travertine. Spring Issues at base of Mil where water forms 1-m-diameter pool.
Sampled near pipe below water surface, where water seems to be entering
pool. Spring Issues from valley floor. Sampled near point of issue of main
spring near house.

58

Table 1.--Sample site descriptions Continued

Site

Site name

Sample

No. type

Remarks

Nevada Contlnued

NV25 Nevada Hot Springs (A, to north; B, to south)

NV26 Darrough Hot Springs

WS

NV27 Spring In Gillts Range NV28 Spring 1n Nye Canyon

W W

NV29 Grant View hot springs NV30 Soda Springs at Sodavtlle

WS US

NV31 Spring near Aurora NV32 Spring at Teels Marsh NV33 Gap Spring

W WS WS

NV34 Alkali Hot Spring

WS

NV35 Sllverpeak artesian well(?) W

NV36 Spring

W

Springs Issue from talus bank about 5 m above road level and flow along ditch In talus before descending to valley floor. Sampled where water flows from talus 1n middle of spring area and also where water flowed from pipe set In ground at north end of spring area In 1977 (pipe dry In 1979).
Water gushes horizontally from valved pipe at wellhead in spring area on valley floor. Sampled where water emerges from pipe. Encrustations have formed on wellhead apparatus.
Spring issues on slope and flows about 3 m through 3-cm-diameter pipe. Sampled where water flows from pipe. Water used for stock.
Spring Issues at base of outcrop in ditch on north side of road. Sampled at point of Issue, where water forms l-m-d1ameter pool. Water used for stock.
Springs Issue at base of outcrop on southeast side of river. Sampled at main spring, which rises in 0.5-m-diameter pool.
Springs issue In several places on valley floor on west side of highway. Sampled at edge of spring In north end of area at highest altitude of slope, where water rises in 3-m-diameter pool.
Spring rises In l-m-d1ameter metal barrel at base of hill. Sampled 1n barrel.
Spring issues In irregular-shaped pond few meters diameter. Sampled at edge of pond.
Spring issues on side of mound near base of hill. Sampled at point of issue, where water rises In l-m-d1ameter pool. Mound of inactive travertine Is about 500 m long, 100 m across, and 15 m high.
Spring issues from dugout, partly collapsed adit and also flows from about 15-cm-diameter pipe 30 m from adit. Sampled where water pours from end of pipe. Large Inactive travertine shelf 1s present nearby.
Water gushes from pipe leading from building over spring source at base of east side of small hill and empties Into pool. Sampled at end of pipe. Could not locate spring shown on 7 1/2-min. topographic map.
Confidential.
New Mexico

NM 1 Soda Dam Hot Springs
NM 2 San Francisco Hot Springs NM 3 G1la Hot Springs NM 4 Mimbres Hot Springs NM 5 Faywood Hot Springs

W S Springs issue at several places In and near "dam," which 1s a large ridge of travertine extending most of the way across river. Sampled at one point of issue about 40 m downstream from "dam" on northwest bank of river about 1 m above river level, where radioactivity was relatively high.
W Spring issues at river level on east bank of river. Tested at spring pool.
W Springs issue at numerous places along east bank of creek. Tested at one point of issue.
W Springs issue on hillside behind house and form small creek. Tested at at one point of issue.
W S Spring issues near top of inactive travertine mound about 20 m high. Sampled at point of issue, where water rises in pool about 2 m diameter.
Utah

UT 1 Udy Hot Springs

WS

UT 2 Garland Springs
UT 3 Locomotive Springs
UT 4 Salt Spring near Tremonton
UT 5 Crystal Springs (A, cold spring; B, hot spring)

W W W WS

UT 6 Poison Spring

WS

UT 7 Painted Rock spring UT 8 Little Mountain hot spring

WS W

UT 9 Stinking Hot Springs (A, near W S cliff; B, near bathhouse)

Springs issue 1n numerous places in river and on west bank of river. Sampled at one spring in central part of area. Water possibly treated
with CuS04 to prevent algae growth. Travertine deposits have formed in area. Water used for swimming and bathing. Spring issues Into large pond. Small building located over spring source.
Sampled at pipe at head of pond. Springs issue 1n several places on mudflats. Sampled Baker Spring at edge
of large pond about 15 m diameter where water seems to rise. Springs issue at base of hill. Sampled at one of numerous points of issue
near west side of area. Hot spring issues from underneath stone wall near swimming pool. Sampled
at point of Issue where water pours out. Encrustations of travertine form along drainage. Cold spring Issues 1n pool a few meters north of
hot spring. Water used for swimming pool. Spring issues 1n 20-m-diameter irregular-shaped shallow pond. Point of
issue is not obvious. Sampled at edge of pond. Spring issues at base of rock outcrop. Sampled at point of issue. Spring Issues at southwest end of Little Mountain on south side of
highway. Sampled where water pours from horizontal pipe conduit. Springs Issue at base of outcrop at southeast end of Little Mountain on
north side of highway. Sampled at spring closest to outcrop near east end of spring area a few meters west of southeast point of outcrop. Also sampled on south side of highway at Intake to bathhouse, where water source Is not obvious. Travertine forms deposits at and below ground level (no mounds), and precipitates coat drainages. H£$ smell. Water used for bathing. Travertine has been mined for barite.

59

Taole 1.--Sample site descriptions Continued

Site

Site name

Sample

No. type

Ulan Continued

Remarks

UT10 Utah Hot Springs

WS

UT11 Ogden hot spring UT12 Hooper Hot Springs UT13 Grantsvllle Warm Springs

WS WS WS

UT14 Midway Hot Springs
UT15 Morgan Ranch Warm Spring UT16 Coyote Springs 1n Simpson
Mountains UT17 Rock Springs
UT18 Wilson Health Springs

WS
W W W WS

UT19 Wildhorse Spring

WS

UT20 Cane Springs UT21 Trough Spring
UT22 L1me Spring UT23 Baker Hot Springs

WS W
WS WS

UT24 Schoenburger Spring UT25 Gandy Warm Springs

W W

UT26 Mourning Dove Spring

W

UT27 Coyote Spring 1n Tule Valley
UT28 Swasey Spring
UT29 Bishop Springs
UT30 Stove Spring
UT31 Tule Spring
UT32 First Spring
UT33 Whisky Spring UT34 Knoll Springs

U W W W W W W W

UT35 Mud Spring
UT36 Stinking Springs near Mantl (A, 1n reeds; B, near

W WS

UT37 Fayette Springs UT38 Ninemlle spring

W W

Springs Issue near base of cliff. Largest flow rises 1n concrete tank and flows out through pipes and then under RR track to west. Sampled 1n 1976 at pipe outlet; sampled 1n 1980 1n newly exposed concrete tank. Iron-rich travertine forms low-lying shelf on west side of RR tracks.
Springs Issue 1n two places on hillside on south side of river. Sampled at eastern spring. Travertine forms deposits around spring.
Springs Issue 1n marshy area on top of low mound on mudflats. Sampled at one point of Issue at west edge of mound.
Springs issue 1n numerous places on mudflats. Sampled at one spring near end of road having relatively low specific conductance and temperature. Water rises 1n circular travertine pools whose rims are about 1 m high. Travertine 1s present over area several hundred meters square.
Springs Issue 1n numerous places on valley floor. Sampled one spring near road (not pot C-2 of Baker, 1968). Inactive travertine forms extensive deposits 1n area. Water used for swimming pool.
Spring rises 1n oblong pond about 30 m long. Point of Issue not obvious. Sampled at southwest edge of pond.
Spring issues from steep hillside. Sampled 1 m from point of Issue.

Spring Issues 1n grassy area on slope. Sampled at point of issue. Water

used for stock. Springs issue at tops of several large low mounds on mudflats. Sampled at

edge of 20-m-d1ameter pool at crest of third mound northeast from south-

west end of spring group. Travertine forms the mounds and Is forming at

the edges of the pools. Spring issues from ground through 5-cm-diameter pipe into 1-m-square

cement-walled covered tank. Sampled where water flows from pipe.

Travertine-cemented colluvlum forms eroded shelf behind spring. Metal

tank 8 m diameter apparently collects water flowing underground from

sampled spring. Water flows from metal tank and 1s forming travertine

encrustations 1n trough. Water used for stock. Spring issues Into peaty area and forms pool about 10 m diameter. Sampled

at pool edge. Water used for stock. Spring issues from colluvlum on hillside. Pipe funnels flow Into cement-

lined trough. Sampled where water flows from pipe into trough. Tested

at point of Issue. Water used for stock. Spring seeps Into I0-m-d1ameter collecting pond from colluvlum on gentle

slope. Sampled at seep on west edge of pond. Water used for stock. Springs Issue over large area of valley floor. Sampled at edge of 10-m-
long Irregular-shaped pool at west-central edge of spring area. Travertine forms extensive low mounds and hummocky terrain. Travertine

has been mined for Mn. Spring Issues into 1-m-square cement-walled covered pool at base of

slope. Sampled in pool. Springs issue along base of cliff and flow down Into natural pool.

Sampled at one spring west of the pool. Travertine forms large shelf between cliff and pool, but no fresh travertine 1s forming. Water

used for swimming. Spring issues at base of cliff and flows through 3-cm-diameter pipe Into

cylindrical cement pool. Sampled at end of pipe, where water flows into

pool. Water used for stock. Spring issues into 1-m-diameter metal cylindrical tank on valley floor.

Sampled in tank. Spring issues into cylindrical metal container and drains out through pipe

emerging from ground 3 m below container. Sampled at end of pipe.

Main springs issue at Twin Springs, two ponds about 10 m diameter on

valley floor. Sampled at edge of south pond.

Spring Issues from bank Into 3-m-long 3-cm-d1ameter pipe. Sampled at end of pipe, where water flows into trough. Water used for stock.

Spring issues 1n reedy area on valley floor. Sampled at 1-m-diameter pool

at south end of marshy area. Spring issues through plastic hose Into trough. Sampled at end of hose.

Water used for stock. Spring issues from colluvial bank in valley. Sampled at point of issue.

Springs Issue as seeps at sides or bases of several 6- to I0-m-h1gh sllt-

and grass-covered mounds. Sampled at 1-m-diameter pool in nummocky

ground 1n northeast part of spring area. Spring Issues 1n marshy area on gentle slope. Sampled at 0.8-m-diameter

metal tank In marshy area. Water used for stock. Springs and seeps Issue 1n several places on hillside. Sampled at north-
easternmost spring, which has largest flow, and at spring near corral.

Travertine apron extends

outward from spring near corral to

southwest. Precipitates are forming in drainages. Spring Issues In grassy area on hillside. Sampled at point of Issue.

Water used for town water supply. Spring Issues near base of hill. Sampled at point of Issue.

60

Table 1. Sample site descriptions Continued

Site

Site name

Sample

No, type

Utah Continued

Remarks

UT39 Oak Spring UT40 Flowing well near Hoi den UT41 Monroe Hot Springs
UT42 Joseph Hot Springs UT43 Thermo Hot Springs UT44 Dixie Hot Springs

W Spring Issues In marshy area on gentle slope. Two 5-cnt-dlameter pipes channel Miter Into 0.8-m-square cement-Mailed tank. Sampled Mhere pipes feed Into tank.
W Water pours out of wellnead beneath wooden cap few meters west of road. One of numerous flowing wells on valley floor In this area. Sampled at wellhead. Water used for Irrigation.
W S Springs Issue near base of hill. Spring several hundred meters north of swimming pool Issues at top of extensive travertine apron about 10 m high. Sampled at point of Issue at top of apron. Fresn travertine 1s forming along drainage.
S Springs Issue over large area on east bank of river. Tested at one point of Issue. Travertine shelf has formed around springs.
W S Springs Issue along tops and sides of two low ridges on desert valley floor. Tested spring south of road on southeast flank of southern ridge. Travertine forms ridges.
W S Springs issue on north and south banks and in bed of river. Sampled at easternmost large spring 1n cave on south side of river. Travertine forms deposits around springs, and white precipitates are visible 1n river bed. Water used for swimming pool.
Wyoming

WY 1 Taylor artesian well at Tnermopolls
WY 2 Ulcer spring at Tnermopolls
WY 3 Big Spring at Thermopolls

WS WS
W

WY 4 Wedding of the Waters spring
WY 5 Granite Creek Hot Spring

WS WS

WY 6 AstoMa Mineral Hot Springs W S

WY 7 Stinking Springs at Hoback Canyon
WY 8 Wasnakie Mineral Hot Springs

W WS

WY 9 Auourn sulphur springs

WS

WY10 Sulphur Springs at Doty Mountain (A, to north; B. to south)

WS

Water flows from wellhead about 1 m above ground. Sampled at wellhead. Travertine forms Irregular mound around well. H£$ smell.
Spring Issues at west base of RR cut on west bank of river 15 m south of foot bridge which crosses river from Thennopolls State Park on east bank. Sampled at point of Issue. Some precipitate lines
drainage. Spring rises 1n 8-m-d1ameter pool with vigorous bubbling of large-
volume flow at base of cliff. Sampled at edge of pool. Extensive travertine shelf has formed on east bank of river between hills and river. Travertine 1s still forming along drainages and at river edge. State Park. Spring issues 1n irregular-shaped shallow pond east of road on east side of river at base of cliff. Point of Issue not obvious. Sampled at
edge of pond. Spring issues from crevices 1n rock. Sampled at point of Issue before
water flows Into cement-lined pool. Water used for swimming. State Park. Springs Issue on terrace at bend of river on south bank. Sampled at point of Issue of one spring northeast of the northeast corner of swimming pool about 3 m above river level. Travertine 1s forming along drainage.
Water used for swimming pool. Springs issue on north and south sides of river at mouth of canyon.
Sampled easternmost of three springs on south side of river. White
precipitate coats drainages. H£$ smell. Spring Issues in large pool about 50 m diameter. Point of Issue not
obvious. Sampled at outlet from pool. Travertine deposits are present around edges of pool. Water used for swimming. Springs issue 1n area about 10 by 30 m on north side of pond about 50 by 20 m across. Sampled at hottest point of issue at east side of spring area, apparently a well flowing at ground level. Numerous mounds of travertine and sulfurous precipitates up to 1.5 m high are forming around points of Issue. Older travertine 1s visible around edges of pond. H^S smell. Deposits have been mined for S. Springs issue in two 2- to 3-m-diameter pools, one on east side of road and one on west side of road about 100 m to south. Sampled at points
of issue.

61

Table 2. --Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States

[Except as noted, Al, Ba, Be, B, Cr, Co, Cu, Ga, Ge, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, Sc, Ag, Sr, W, V, Yb, Y, and Zr were done by SPEC, and As, Cd, Pb, Li, Hg, Se, and Zn were done by AA. Except as noted, Ra values are for Ra-226 done by RN. Sb, Bi, and La, done by SPEC, were not detected in any samples. Sn, determined by SPEC, was detected in one sample and is discussed in footnote 23. Ratios of Ra and U to spc are shown as times 1,000. Footnotes are designated in column 2 and are shown at the end of the table. Abbreviations used in the table are shown below]

ymd temp fid spc IDS ROE do lab alk hard tot SPEC ICP WC AA RN PLN C ppm ppb mv rng/L ug/L pCi/L REF UEF AZ
CA CO ID MT NV NM
UT WY

year, month, day temperature field measurement specific conductance in micromhos per centimeter total dissolved solids in milligrams per liter residue on evaporation dissolved oxygen laboratory alkalinity total hardness emission spectrographic method for trace-element analysis inductive coupled plasma method for trace-element analysis wet-chemical method for trace-element analysis atomic absorption method for trace-element analysis carrier-precipitation radon method for radium analysis carrier-precipitation planchet method for radium analysis degrees Celsius parts per million parts per billion millivolts milligrams per liter micrograms per liter picocuries per liter radium enrichment factor: 2.95 x (Ra/U) uranium enrichment factor: 0.339 x (U/Ra) Arizona
California Colorado Idaho Montana Nevada New Mexico
Utah Wyoming

62

Sample
AZ 1 AZ 3 AZ 5 AZ 6 AZ 9
AZ1 3 AZ1 4 AZ1 6 AZ1 7 AZ1 3
CA 1 CA 2 CA 3 CA 4 CA 5
CA 6 CA 7 CA 8 (Ji CA 9 V" CA10
CO 1 CO 2 CO 3 CO 4 CCS
CO 6 CO 7 CO 8 CO 9 C01 C
C01 1 C01 2A C01 20 CC1 4 C01 5
C01 6 COW C01 9 CC21 C022
CC24 CC25 CC26 C027 ID 1

Table 2. --Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the 'western States

LATITUOE
36 29 57 36 28 37 36 20 47 36 20 44 3o 15 43
36 1 1 39 35 54 59 33 49 54 33 4 49 32 59 55
3d 41 52 3d 32 27 36 24 16 33 21 3 33 1 4 46
38 1 2 41
3d 1 2 7
3 3 5 10 33 2 51 38 2 1
40 6 2 40 4 31 39 33 40 3s> 1 27 39 1 5
38 59 45 33 5 1 1 1 33 50 20 3d 47 20 33 47 9
33 46 ?1 3rf 46 1 1 38 46 1 1 38 44 1 7 38 36 5
36 30 53 38 29 4b 38 10 5 38 8 40 38 1 7
37 46 18 37 <.5 7 37 27 42 37 26 57 43 33 54

LONGITUO

11151 1 1 1 50 1 1 2 43 1 12 40
1 12 55

26 42 29 15
3

113 4 11319
1 10 35 10918 109 53

59 59 48
8 53

1 19 50 1 19 23 1 19 23 11923 11912

49 37 36 58 13

119 9 28 119 7 1 1 1 16 57 53 119 4 49 1 18 54 1 1

106 15 47 1C6 6 43 1C7 19 16 105 37 48 1 05 47 38

105 57 30 105 56 37 1 07 38 7 107 50 31 107 56 1 5
1 07 46 9 107 45 30 1 07 45 32 105 31 47 105 32 58

1U6 30 26 106 4 33 105 55 4 1 07 44 1 107 40 26

108 5 35 106 49 46
105 5 52 1 07 43 1 4 111 41 16

f oo tnot e
--
--
.1 .1 .1 .1 .2
.3 .3 .3 10.4 11.5
.3 .3 .3 .3 .3
.1 12.1 13.0 14.6 15.0
14.6 14.6
.1 16.6 17.6
18.6 19.7 19.7 20.7 20.7
21.1 20.7 22.6 23.4 24. u
21.1 25.6 26.6 27. 1
.1

date ymd
760, 429 760, 429 760, 507 76o, 507 760, 5Gb
760, 5U9 7oO, 51 1 760, 207 760, 206 760, 20o
790, 709 790, 71 1 790, 706 770, 510 770, 51 1
790, 705 790, 705 790, 701 79u, 703 79U, 7U2
76u, 621 76U, 621 760, 921 760, 925 760, 925
760, 925 760, 925 750, 521 720, 910 720, 910
740, 830 73L, 912 730, 912 SOU, 624 800, 624
75u, 51 7 8UO, 625 750, 516 770, 623 75u, 519
75U, 725 750, 726 751,, 726 75L, 726 760, 626

temp C
18 18 20 19 17
26 25 21 56 44
60 13
6 59 69
15 24 12 66 30
28 45 50 19 57
9 10 41 22 16
13 15 14
8 12
69 66 59 52 60
41 56
7 31 45

pH fid
8.2 8.0 8.3 8.3 8.1
7.4 6.7 7.3 7.5 8.2
7.7 6.7 7.0 6.7 6.9
7.5 8.0 9.5 7 .7 6.3
7.7 6.7 6.4 6.7 7.0
6.4 6.9 6.6 7.4 6.3
6.3 6.5 2.9 6.3 6.3
8.1 7.7 6.9 6.3 6.5
6.9 7.0 7.5 6.4 7.1

spc fid
340 360 2,1 30 1 ,350 1 ,830
1,340 11 ,900 40,000 18,000
5,000
1 ,300 114 63
2,600 4 ,600
360 140 780 1,350 3,000
2,650 2,020 35,000 6,300 3,800
4,500 26,400
3,200 1 1,500 13,800
3,300 5,000 2,600 7/500 12,000
750 1,020 1,000 2,900 1,950
1 ,300 2,440
500 6,200 9,500

IDS sum
--
__ -34,200 10,500 --
1 ,340 94 83
1 ,750 3,390
189 129 494 1 ,200 2,060
1 ,560 1 ,190 19,900 3,740 2,190
2,770 27,200
2,010 --
9,960
2,440 3,190 2,130 4,840 9,940
549 649 649 2,730 1 ,680
1 ,260 1,500
304 3,670 5,390

TDS ROE
--
--
__ -----
__ --2,270 3,850
-----
__ --3,780 2,240
2,730 27,400
3,120 8,UQ 17,900
3,440 3,420 2,120 4,620 9,7bO
-684 672
-1,930
-1,440
313 5,370
--

do (jpm

Eh mv

1 .80 7.70 8.40 1 .UO
.30
5.90 5.90
.10 1 .10
.10

-20 20
UO -80 -100
80 80 -300 -50 -170

-240 -250 -270
90 40 -10
-50
-50

Tdble 2. --Analyses of udter samples from 163 springs in the Western States

Sample
AZ 1 AZ 3 AZ 5 AZ 6 AZ 9
AZ1 3 AZ1 4 AZ1 6 AZ1 7
AZI a
CA 1 CA 2 CA 3 CA 4 CA 5
CA 6 CA 7
CA a
CA 9 C A1 U
CO 1 CO 2 CO 3 CO 4 CO 5
CC o CO 7 COS CO 9 CC10
C01 1 C01 2A C01 2B C01 4 C01 5
C016 C01 7 CC1V C021 C022
C024 C025 C026 C027 10 1

RapCi/L Ra 228
.1 5 .1 7 .66 .36 .10
.36 23. GO 120.00 1 4 .Ju
.62
7.10
.10
.05 1 5.00
2.30
.12 .01 .1 2 .1 3 .09
16.00 3.30
24.00 2.oO 5.10
.20 2.40 9.10 9.00 2.60
.55 2.90 1 .50 16.00 310.00
.08 .75 6.40 3.3U 5.10
1 .50 4.60 2.70 28.00 Zd.JO

Uug/L
.50 .50 3.50 6.40 3.60
3.50 7.10 1 3.00
.50 1 .00
.46 .50 .20 2.20 .64
2.10 1 .00
.08 .02 .27
.06
.07 .30 .20
1 .90 .20 .03
3.10 16.00
.45 .59 4. 50 57.00 110.00
.23 .04 . < .40 . 13 .03
.45 < .40
.01 2 .40
.04

Rn pCi/L
----530
1 /300 1/300 2/700
760 13u
440 960 180 160 450
510 300
56 210
1 '300 110 960
10/000
1 40 5/200 2/100
300 2/500
72

He ppb
-760
1 /500 -740
1 /200 70
1 /3CO -700
1 /1GO

KEF
.69 1 .00
.23 .1 7 .03
.30 9.60 27.00 52.00 2.40
46.00 .94 .74
20.00 1 1 .00
.1 7 .03 4 .40 19.00 9.70
790.00 >970.GO 1 /OOO.OO
26.00 75.00
.31 35.00 590.00
8.60 .48
3 .60 15.00
.98 .93 8.00
1 .00 55.00 >47 .00 75.00 500.00
9.80 >34 .00 800.00
34 .00 2/100.00

Ra/Spcon
.440 .470 .310 .270 .055
.270 1 .900 3.000
.760 .160
3.900 1 .400
.600 5.800
.500
.330 .071 .1 50 .070 .300
6.000 1.600
.690 .410 1 .300
.044 .091 2.800 .780 .1 90
.1 70 .580 .580 2.400 25.000
.1 10 .740 6.400 1 .1 00 3.600
.810 2.100 5.400 4.700 2.900

UEF
1 .1000 1 .0000 4.4000 6.0000 12.0000
3.3UOO .1000 .0370 .0190 .4100
.0220 1 .1000 1.4000
.0500 .0940
5.9000 34.0000
.2300 .0520 .1000
.0013 <.0010
.0010 .0390 .0130
3.200C .0280 .0011 .1200
2.1000
.2800 .0690 1.0000 1 .1000 .1200
.9700 .0180 <.0210 .0130 .0020
.1000 <.0300
.001 3 .0290 .0005

U/spc on
1 .5000 1 .4000 4 .0000 4.7000 2.0000
2.6000 .6000 .3300 .0440 .2000
.2600 4.4000 2.4000
.8500 .1400
5.8000 7.1000
.1000 .01 10 .0900
.0230 <.0050
.0020 .0480 .0530
.4200 .0076 .0094 .2700 1 .2000
.1400 .1200 1.7000 7.6000 9.2GOO
.3100 .0390 <.4100 .0450 .0210
.2400 <.1800
.0200 .4000 .0042

Si02 mgL
------
__ -23.0 8.0 --
93.0 32. U 38.0 110.0 88.0
72.0 55.0 40.0 77.0 120. U
25.0 33.0 30.0 16.0 39.0
14.0 12.0 <!5.0 10.0 17.0
38.0 17.0 60.0 67.0 07.0
77.0 75.0 46.0 54.0 49.0
34.0 86.0
6.0 64.0 29.0

Ca mg/L
-. --
__ .520.0 930.0
33.0 7.8 5.7
41.0 74.0
14.0 9.9 1.0
14.0 49.0
13.0 15.0 450.0 56. U 113.0
57.0 847.0 110.0 140. 0 230.0
98.0 110.0 170.0 110.0
45.0
8.6 18.0 58.0 290.0 380.0
330.0 65.0 33.0
350.0 450.0

9K8 ££1 -£58 61Z
901 07£ --
5£l
__ -l> 09Z' 1 O90'l
__ O90'£ 09Z' I ---
__
6/5 £99 516
P££'l OS£ OZZ Z7 £8
077' I 016 8Z 8£ OZ9
Zll Ol9'l

52* oo*
in*>
10*> £0*
£0* 10* 10*> 10*> IP*
10*> 10*> 91* ?1" 5Z*
I 1*
Zl* 10*> 10*>
in*> ir*>
Of
10*> IZ*
----
55* 7£'
zr

10 >

'10
01 0I

>
>

90

10 >

20 01 01 10

>
>
>

02 01 >

87

10 10

>

01 > --

10 01

>

06 *

01 01

*> >

10 I0 10

> >

01 *£ £0 Z9 Z9 U"

10 10 > 0£ * I
Z£
10 *>

10*

5

Z*

£
2

5*

0* 8 9*

ff 9* £ £' 7 0* 01 0* 5 I
f-2 6' I L' 52 9* I
6* Z* 2
7* z
£* Z*

6* I

0* 8

£*
0*

I Zl

0* ? l

z* z*

1

7

8"

2f"

9*
z*

5 5

f Z*
z7

Z*Z 8*Z

0 *007'Z 0 *005' I 5 *6

0 0

*lf *9

Z

o *£7
0 *98 0 *8£ 0 *Z7 0 *9l

o *0£6'£

0 " 0££' I

0
00

'5?
ozz
*OZ£

0 *007'Z

0 0

*009' *OZ£

1

0 *006'7l

0 *09Z' I

0 '818 0 *09 I' I 0 '000' I 1 0 "05 I 0 *05Z

c ozz

0 *0££

0
z

*?l *Z

£"f

0 oiz
0 *09 I
z
£*£
n "06 1

0*007'9 0*000'6l

o- ooz

0' ozz

0'

0*

Z7
591

0* OS£

0* 000' I 0* OOZ' 1
0* 65 I 0' 991 0* 081

0* 0*

£11 7£l

0* 0*

DOS' 76

I

0* OZ9

0* 009' z

0' 0* 0' 0*

OZ8 85 066'
78Z

I

0* 00£

0* 0* 0*

Z7 000' 0£l

I

0* 96

0* 0* 0*

06 0£l 09

0' 0*

II 91

0* OZ6

0' OZZ

9* 0*

9 £

i

0* OOZ

0* £7 0*001'1

L 12
zni
£7
t>

080' 1 Z9l I 9? 9Z6 Z.Z3
6ZI 017 £Z£ 681 591
0££'7 0£6'Z L> 05 I'Z 06Z' I
OSZ'l 0£Z'£ 075' I fOZ 671
56Z OZZ' I 90Z POS 868
OZ9' I i Z7 98Z ZS 101
09Z'l 01 I' I 7£ 97 9SZ
9£l 096'

0*061 06** IIZ 0*97 0*61
0*01 0*8Z 0*£l 0*R 0*01
nO-'OizOZ o*zz
0* L 7 0*8Z
0*18 O'lZ 0*9£ 0*9Zl 0*91
0*Z£ 0*Z9 00**OLZZ I 0*5 I
0*95 6*8 0*5 I 9*Z 8*Z
0*55 0*6£ 0*£ 6* 0*£l
O'lZ 0*09Z

0*005' I 0*0£8 0*5Z 0*Z97 0*S£
O'OZl 0*077 0*971 0*P6l 0*091
0*059'£ 0*009' I 0' 081 0*001' I 0*095
0*00l'£ O'OOZ'Z 0*019 0*000'6 0'076
0*759 0*017' I 0*009*9 0*0£7 0*065
0*059 0*OZ7 0*0<?l 0*91 0*Zl
o-ooi'i
O'OZS 6*7 0*01 0*0£7
0*000'£ 0*000'Zl

0" ?P 0*75 5*7 0*71 0*57
n*6
0*81 09** £1 7*
0*5Zl 0" 96 0*86 0*£7 P*07l
0*D7Z 0*56 0*7£ 0* ?? I 0*61
0*61 0*ZZ 0*6" 5*£ 0*7
C*C5 0*£ Z* I* 1 1*9
0*Pl 0* 11 5* I Z'Z 6* 1
0*7? O'OZZ

£ON+20N

1/6ui

13

70S

-|/6m

£ODH

, 34) ui sBuiJds

JSJPH jo

~\ I f> ui P N

1 01 <?ZOD 9ZOD 5ZOD 7ZOD
ZZOD IZOD 6 IOD Z IOD 910D
5 IOD 710D OZ IOD VZ IOD I IOD
3LOD 6 OD 6 OD / OD 9 OD
5 OD 7 OD T OD Z OD I OD
01 VD 6 VD 8 VD Z VD 9 VD
5 VD 7 VD £ VD Z VD I VD
8 IZV i IZV 9 IZV 7 IZV I LZ V
6 ZV 9 ZV 5 ZV £ ZV I ZV
a ) dii P 5

in v£>

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States

San-pie

AZ 1 AZ 3 AZ 5 AZ 6 AZ 9

AZ1 3 AZ 1 4 AZ16 AZ17 AZ1S

CA 1 CA 2 CA 3 CA t* CA 5

CA 6 CA 7
CA 8 CA 9 CA1C

CO 1 CO 2 CO 3 CO 4 CO 5

CO 6 CO 7 CO 3 CO 9 CC10

C01 1
C01 2A
C0123
cqi 4
CC15

C016 C01 f CC19 C021 C022

.

C024
C025 CC26 C027 ID 1

hard tot
'2CO .400
9U 31 20 1 50 260
60 29
3 47 360
e.9 52
1, 5JO
253 3b2
221 2, 830
410 --
1 ' oJO
820 450 830 673 630
23 48 199
990
1, QUO 222 1U2
1, 100 1, 500

A I uc/L

As ug/L

20 21U <25u <30
<50 30U 10U
10 10
100 100 <50 <50 300
50 20 2U 11U 22
22 75 55 3<50 1,200
20 75 1U,OUO 26 60
85 18 14 20 80
40 13 16 100 30

420 1
<1 1,UOO
--
2 2 64 1 81
__ 5
<1 --
2
-_
460 150
__ 3 4 2
140
<-,
3 28 240 13
5 21 ---

B a ug/L

Be ug/L

200.UU 100.00 <200.UO 1,300.00
10U. 00 10. 00
50. uo 95. uo 54. uo
10. OU
5. uo
5. uO 1U. 00
100. uo
300. 00 100. UO 100. 00 480. uO
64. uo
12. UO
40. uo 4 ,000. uo
<250. 00
<1 9. uo
17. 00 3,500. 00
37. uo
55. OG
99. uo
94. 00
88. uo 100. uo
35. 00 4o. 00
55. 00
130. uo 100. uo
45. UO
50. uo

<5.00 <3C.OC OOG.OO <40.UG
<1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00
4 .50 3 .90
<1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00
<10 .OU 00 .00
20 .00 12 .OU <2 .GO
<2 .OG <2 .00
<5 .oc
26 .00 <2 .00
<6 .00 2 .00
12 .OU 7 .00
22 .OU
<1 .00 .40
< .20 <1 .90 <2 .00
<2 .OU 2 .00 .10
<6 .oc
<30 .UU

8 ug/L

Cd ug/L

Cr ug/L

CO ug/L

C u ug/L

550.0 12,GOO.0 23,000.0
1 ,100.0
3, 000 .0 <5 .0 <5 .0
>2, 300 .0 >3, 900 .0
30 .0 <5 .0 700 .0 5, UOU .0 5, GOO .0
400 .0 360 .0 860 .0 1 , 800 .0 450 .0
150 .0 460 .0 800 .0 3, 200 .0 5, 900 .0
770 .0 5, 300 .0
330 .0 780 .0 6, 300 .0
60 .0 44 .0 200 .0 380 .0 180 .0
90 .0 2, 100 .0
53 .0 2, 000 .0 2, 80U .0

<20.00 O30.00 <300.00 <100.00

<20.00 <130.00 <500.00 <160.JO

<5.00 <30.00 <100.00
<35.00

<2.30 <3.90

3.40 4.20

<5.00 9.60

<35.00 <25.00
1U.JO <4.uO <4.00
<4.QQ <4.0Q <1 5.00 <3.00 <3.00
<8.00 <1 .00 26.00 <1 .00 0 .00
<4 .00 <2.00 <2.00 <2.70 <9.00
<9.00 <2.00 <1 .00 <25.00 000.00

<35.GO <25.UO
<1 .00 <2.00 <2 .UU
<2.00 <2.00 <1 5.UO <5.UJ <5.00
<16.00 <3.0U
<22.00 <2.UO <2.00
<4.00 <1 .00 <1 .00 <2.70 <2.Uu
<9.0U <1 .00 <2.UO <25.00 <100.00

<7.00 2.00
<1 .00 <.20
<2.00
<2.00 <2.00 <3.00 10.00 27.00
<4.00 <10.00
40.00 <20.00 <20.00
1 .00 OO.OO OO.OO
11 .00 2.00
<2.00 OO.OO <46.00
7.00 <20.00

ooooo
(NJ f\J I\J (NJ

ooooo

(NJ (NJ

*>

ooooo
_»_»_ _ _»

ooooo
_»

oooo

L9

oooa c ccaco

o CD o ooc

A AAA
cocc oocc

A A AA A
o o o o c o c; o oc co oooo

iiiii

cocac ccooo

o c c o o cr c c o OOOOO OOOOO c a c a c o c o o cr

iii ii i

CO I
ca

v/1 O *
coo

IIIII II I II

-« v/» (VI A O O Wl f~
ooc c
cccc
O CO O

-ft Co
Nl O

o f- o - o O C (Nj O C cr c cr o cr

-» A vyi f^> C^

oaooo coaco

CTOOCO

AA
c a cr c c

-t
ccooo

oooao ooooc

v/iCC

-O-"

CC^CO
ooo^cc

->JC(NJ

rv>

CJCCoOoO
cccrcrc

OO-OCI cooc

OO^rvj

C OC

oco\^i ooooo crooc

OO

C

coccrc

OO
oc

f- o *c » o
OOOJOO

o -> o o- (NJ -sj i* ooooo ooooo

-» -> o o o ooooo

O O O O \J1
ooooo

coooo o cr o o o

ocooo

ocooo

ft- -s) (NJ A
O O -» INJ
I .O O O O
I OOOO

III III

.A I A .A I
_. I _. _. I

.A .A . .A .A
_._.ug_>_.

A AAA

II II

-« 00 O isi o O O

ooooc oooao

AA \*n » o>i O> -NJ C O O
ooooo

(V> ->J A A <-n O O> -
I «OO. OO
I O O CJ O

o IIII
IO I I I I

II II II II

-ft A

O INj A

A

O <-n »-" CO -o

oooco coooc

ocooo ooooo

A O1-
aoooo aooa o

«A -^ \^1 -*
oooaa ooooo

AAAINJ «^_4«^l/1
aoaao oaoca

III

II II II

II II

II II

OO i oooo o o oooo

89

OOOOO
IVJ (VI (Vj (Vj
-» -vl O ul f-

OOOOO OOOOO OOOOO

(VJ (VI » » »

»-» » » »

(VI - O -M O

v/l r- IVJ <VJ -»

O-OOO-vlO

OCOOO
Wl f- L* r\J -»

O O rvi -» O OOO OC

o (Vj -> -» O C-vlOOO

ivj rvj L* CM O OOOOC

OCO^J-d O O C O C.

-00000 OC O OO

IIII I

OJ rvi I I I -OlAi

IOOO OCO

c c o- o c. crcccc ooooo

cr o < " t* -o o o c. c o oococr

oooc c cccoc oo c c o

c-ooocr c c c cr o oooco

COCOM ccrooo oooco

c o L* o co-go c. oc.ooo

ooocc o o c c cooooo

ccG o ccroc icoc. o

1 1 1 II 1 1 II

w o 1*111
10 1 1 1

11

11

11

11

1
1

11111 11111

11111
111 11

11111
1111 1

-A
Or; rvi C *~rf
. III
OO 1 1 1

Illll Illll

O rvi A -* A V/l U1 -vl * >O
00o O O

A A -» -* A
*O Oo (Vi fvi 4>
O -vi O O O

A
~J Ou » rvi A O ^J~" ^^ O CD
ooooo

AA
rvi v/i -» vji » O »-" O O O
OOOOO

* rvi wi rv» rvi J> ui O O c
OOOOO

II III

*A IVJ -vj
OO-illl

AA
o *«n o * ocoo
1 O OO O

III III

A 11
o1 1 (VJ O 1
O
oo

AA
I (Vj O O 1 -si O O
o oo

(Vi (V) IAI OM
O 00 0 0000

1 1

OO 1 OO
oo oo oo oo

OOIII
oo oo

Illll

lAllAllll
-o *oo

IIllllllll

IIIII IIIII

AA r\i
11 1
1 1 OC 1 0o

AAA
11
| -> 0 0 1
ooo

A A (VJ A
1 0C00 1
0C 00

A
_. -.

C O 1 J> «-
oo oo

J> J> 1 1 1
oo

Illll

A
Oc->lll
oc

Illll Illll

IIII IIII

A
O 0 (VJ O O
ooO OO

OOOOO OOOOO

O O O (V) o O0O0o

AA
OOOOO OOOOO

AA OOOOO OOOOO

wiv/ivjnwi(«n OOOOO

AA wiOv/iOwi OOOOO

-si A
oooo
1 O OO C

(III IIII

A (Vl A

A

0 0 - (VJ O

00C OO
00oO0

A
i-n -st (Vj (Vj -st
OOOOO OOOOO

A vj vj^ rv* ~^ 0
o o oo o oooc0

A (VJ V/l O (V) (V)
OOOOO
c ooo o

A (Vj A A
rvi (vj o C o
OOOOO OOOOO

Illll

AA
oo o
OOIII OO

A
ASA IA* O *Vj A
0 0C0 1 OOOO
o ooo

II I I I IIIII

Sample
ID 2 ID 3 ID 4 ID 5 ID 6
MT 1 MT 2 MT 3 MT 4 MT 5
MT 6 MT 7 MT d MT 9 MT1 0
MT1 1 MT1 2 MT1 3 MT1 4 S NV 1
NV 2 NV 3 NV 5 NV 6A NV 68
NV 7 NV 8 NV 9 NV1C NV1 1
NV1 2 NV1 3 NV1 4 NV1 5 NV1 6
NV1 7 NV13 N V 1 .9 NV20 NV21
NV22 NV23 NV24 NV2 5A NV258

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States--continued

LATITUDE
A3 25 24 A2 39 25 A2 37 11 A2 9 18
0 U OB
4<b 35 36 4o 32 50 A6 26 51 40 26 48 A6 1 1 5b
A6 10 AU A6 2 33 45 53 AS A5 A1 7 A5 3A 28
A5 27 A3 A3 27 3A A5 22 3 A5 5 24 A1 5528
A1 A7 26 A 1 A3 16 A1 9 A3 40 57 AA 40 57 41
AC 50 34 40 49 AA AO 39 41 AO 35 1 2 AO 33 41
AO 24 24 AO 24 6 40 22 4 40 514 40 5 8
39 46 37 39 AO 1 39 33 27 39 32 20 39 2A 45
39 19 30 39 1 6 58 38 55 8 33 53 59 38 53 57

LONGITUO

111 111 112
112 U

24 50 36 16
019
20 53 0 OB

112 110 111 111 112

652 54 10 58 57 59 14
542

112 47 42 112 48 37 112 13 59 112 17 29 111 41 40

112 113 113 110 118

2b 27 619
24 11 46 24 42 33

119 118 1 14 117 117

624 30 17 59 5 29 28 29 35

117 11 117 18 11921 11517 1 16 35

59 19 57
5 22

117 53 11631 117 19 117 43 114 38

40 5
32 29 40

114 50 59 114 48 26 116 21 32 114 54 54 114 46 42

116 50 56 114 51 56 118 11 44 119 24 39 119 24 39

f ootnote
.1 .1
28.1
.3 .3 .3 .3 .3
.3 .3 .3 .3 .3
.3 .3 .3 .3 .5
.5 .5 29.5 30.4 .4
.4 .5 .5 .5 .5
.5 .4 .5 .4 .3
.3 31 .0
.5 .3 .3
.5 .3 .3 .4 32.5

date ymd
76U,62S 7ou,629 760*629 7oO,630
--
780,813 780/320 760,8 1o 780*817 780,816
780,819 78U,o19 780,819 780,821 780,820
780/821 780,821 780,822 78u,81 5 770,507
770,507 770,507 770,518 770,505 770,505
770,505 770,505 770,508 77u,517 770, 50*.
770,508 770,504 770,506 770,506 780,824
780,825 770,516 770,51 5 780,825 760,824
770,514 7dO,825 790,628 770,510 77U,510

teir.p C
17 30 42 24 75
60 48 54 28 73
77 65 60 69 43
52 45 58 63 86
22 54 35 60 33
15 34 92 93 90
66 27 66 51 1U
18 78 42 24 18
72 34 54 63 61

pH fid
6.5 7.0 6.8 7.3 7.2
9.4 6.9 6.6 6.3 8.4
7.0 8.5 8.9 8.0 7.S
6.7 9.2 7.G 6.9 7.9
7.9 8.7 6.6 7.0
--
7.0 7.1 8.0 8. A 9. A
6.9 --
7.1 7.3 8.6
7.3 6.7 7.5 7.3 7.3
7.6 7.3 8.0 9.0 9.0

spc fid
A, 350 A, 100 1 ,430 2,200 3,150
1 ,060 2,360 1 ,360 1,510
560
1,510 860 480 900 960
2,250 230
1 ,OAO 2,600
965
130 A20 1/730 870 850
740 1,020 7,300
630 1,170
3,500 570
1,480 1,430
360
430 560 600 470 650
1,210 500
1,350 540 520

TOS sum
2,560 2,310
1,900
640 1 ,470
970 1,060
41 7
1 ,230 574 376 649 668
1 ,730 182 670
2,050 679
128 306 1 ,190 577
--
-660 4,460 504 1 ,100
1 ,950 .
989 --
176
198 339 370 252 401
859 294 1,030
-355

IDS ROE
--
--
_----
-----
----852
163 412 1,650 858
-965 4,910 752 1,450
2,510
1,480
_542 496
--
1,190 ----
425

do Eh mv

--
--
__ -----
-_ ---_ --
-_ --__ --
o.OO --
1.00 --
11 .00
3.40 -----
----
--
-.50 .40 --
~
.60 -4.70 .20 .40

--
-130 -140
--120 -340
-170 -175 -240
90 --
-120 100 100 95
--
-560 -60
---
----260
270 -110
-270 130
250 -30
--10

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

Sample
ID 10 ID 4 ID 5 ID 6
MT 1 MT 2 l-l T 3. MT 4 MT 5
MT 6 MT 7 MT 8 MT 9 MT1 C
MT 1 1 MT1 2 MT1 3 -J M T 1 4 O NV 1
NV 2 NV 3 NV 5 NV oA NV 6b
(JV 7 NV 8 NV 9 NV1 0 NV1 1
NVl 2 NV1 3 NVl 4 (JV1 5 ,JV1 6
NVl 7 NV1 8 NV1 9 NV2C NV21
NV22 NV23 NV24 UV25A NV2 5B

Ra pCi/L
2.30
1 .40 .71
.53 8.00

Ra 228
__ -----

.1 5 2.20 25.00 43.00
.1 8

<1 .6
2.5 16.0 1 2.0 <1 .6

17.00 .06 .05
.1 4
1 .00

11.0 <1 . 7 <1 .7 <1.8
2.4

27.00 .05
3.70
3.50 .20

<2.0 <1 .5
5.7
3.5 "

<.10 <.1u 14.00 3.80 13.00
.«.o
.20 2.30 <.10
.10
a. 40
<.10 7.10 3.10
.55

-~~
--
--
--
__ -<1 .5

.34 1 10.00
12.00 .32 .09
5.oO 5.40
.67

<1 .3 33.0
-<1 .3 <1.4
__
<1 .4 --

U uy/L
.20 .01 .30 .40 .05
02 50 60
< .01 <.01
.02
.01 .02 <.01 .15 <.01
.90 <.01
.1 3 .03 .11
.16 1 .2G
3 .60
1 .70
1 .80 <.01
.04 1 .70 1 .70
.04 2.70
.02 . 18 .62

Kn pCi/L
1/100 62U
25/000 41 /OOO
3,600 390 560 65U 1 2U 60u
13/000 95U 63U 510
1 ,200 31U
670 91
4,300 230
62 300 2/OUU

He ppo
51 1,300

REF
34 .00 4 1 0 .-0 0
7 .00 3.90 470.00
>44 .00 320.00 1 50 .00 210 .00 >53.00
>5,000.00 >18.00 >1 5.00 >41 .00 1 50.00
8,000 .00 7 .40
>1 ,100.00 1 70 .00 >59.00
< .33 --
320.00 370.00 350,00
7.40 .49
>630 .00 --
>30.00
>2/500 .00 < .08
>2,100.00 >910.00 .95
.56 >32,000 .00
690.00 .56 .16
410.00 5 .90
130.00 <1 .60 < .4d

Ra/Spc on
.530 .340 .500 .240 2.500
.140 .930 18.000 28.000 .320
1 1 .000 .070 .1 00 .160
1 .000
12.000 .220
3.600 3.300
.210
<.770 <.240 8.1 00 4 .400 1 5.000
.540 .200 .320 <.1 60 .086
2.400 <.1 80 4.8CO 2.200 1 .500
.790 200.000
20.000 .680 .140
- 4.600 1 1 .000 .640 <.1 90 <.190

UEF
.0300 .OU24 .1400 .2600 .0021
<.0230 .0031 .0063 .0047
<.0190
<.0002 <.0570 <.0630 <.024Q
.OU68
.0001 .1 400 <.0009 .OO&O <.0170
>3.1 000 -.0031 .0027 .0029
.1 400 2.0000 <.001 5
<.0340
<.0004 >1 2.UOOO
<.U005 <.U01 1 1.0000
1.8000 <.0001
.0011
1 .auoo
6.4000
.0024 .1 700 .0073 >.61QO >2.1000

U/spcon

Si02 my L

.0460 .0024 .2100 .1800 .0160
<.0094 .0085 .3700 .4000
<.0180

10.0 29.0
--55.0
1 .3 48.0 70.0 73.0 100.0

<.0066 ' <.0120 <.0210 <.01 10
.0210
.0044 .0870 <.0096 .0530 <.0100
6.9000 <.0240
.0750 .0350 .1300
.2200 1 .2000 <.0014 <.0160 <.0035

53.0 8&. 0 70.0 110.0 89.0
44.0 52.0 47.0 46.0 120.0
53.0 faO.O 71.0 57.0
--
__ 35.0 160.0 150.0 270.0

<.0029
6.3000 <.0068 <.0070 4.7000

110.0 --
74.0 --
16.0

4.2000 <.0180
.0670 3.6000 2.6000

11 .0 49.0
<:a..o
19.0
19.0

.0330 5.4000
.01 50 .3300 1 .2000

150.0 23.0
160.0 --
53.0

Ca mg/L
270.0 860.0
--89.0
'2.0
41 .0 27.0 29.0
3.0
220.0 4.0 3.0 9.0
19.0
300.0 2.0
11.0 330.0
10.0
3.6 1 .9 54.0 36.0
__ 59.0 72.0
1 .0 .8
95.0 --
48.0 --
30.0
. 49.0 69.0 62.0 51.0 73.0
46.0 55.0 14.0
-4.5

Table 2. --Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States--continued

Sa rrp le
10 10 10 10 ID 6
MT 1 MT 2 MT 3 MT 4 MT 5
MT 6 MT 7 MT 8 MT 9 MT10
MT1 1 MT12 MT 1 3 MTU NV 1
MV 2 ,NV 3 NV 5 NV 6 A NV 60
NV 7 NV 3 NV 9 NV1C NV1 1
NV 1 3 NV1 4 NV1 5 NV16
NV1 7 NV18 NV 19 NV20 NV21
NV22 NV2 5 NV24 NV25A NV25B

Mg 61 .U
1 6J.C
24 .0 <. 1
11 .U 4 .7 5.3 < .1
23.0 <.1 <. 1 .2 3.0
71 .0 .1
3 .5 o2.0
.1 .3 < .1 13.0 7.6
< .1

Na mg/L
570.0 13.0
490.0
230.0 430.0 320.0 350.0 120.0
12G.O 180.0 110.0 190.0 200.0
160.0 46.0
240.0 210.0 190.0
22.0 94.0 380.0 150.0

mg/L
65.0 23.0

HC03 mgL
955 803

C03

110.0
10 .0 22 .0 16 .0 19 .0
3 .3
23 .0 4 .1 1 .9 7 .0
1 1 .0
24 .0 .8
1 1 .0 24 .0
8 .5
3 .8 1 .7 39 .0 23 .0

491
120 790 700 770 140
250 140
68 170 370
220 60
61 0 260 150
50 110 1/120 440

<1
18 <1 <1 <1 12
<1 8
18 <1 <1
<1 14 <1 <1 <1
<1 19 <1 <1

S04 mg/L
160.0 600.0
260.0
260 .0 300 .0 160 .0 1 70 .0
78 .0
660 .0 190 .0 110 .0 200 .0 130 .0
970 .0 34 .0 47 .0
1/200 .0 220 .0
10 .0 32 .0 32 .0 60 .0

Cl mg/L
950.0 5.9
630.0
47 .0 1 70 .0
19 .0 23 .0 20 .0
5 .1
16 .0 24 .0 40 .0 26 .0
52 .0 1 .8 9 .2
43 .0 49 .0
5 .0 14 .0 36 .0 23 .0

160.0 1/500.0
140.0 270.0
540.0
290.0
9.0
4.8 16.0 42.0
9.3 18.0
210.0 13.0
260.0
99.0

14.0 1 10.0
9.2 27.0
62.0
34.0
2.9
1.0 5.6 12.0 3.4 4.1
36.0 3.2
1 1 .0
2.2

500 85
210 13 220 200
49Q
820
140
180 310 340 250 200
670 210 207
42 18

91 .0 370.0
41 .0 140.0
66.0
100.0
20.0
17.0 23.0 30.0 18.0 140.0
48.0 64 .0 370.0
140.0

36.0 2*200.0
29.0 65.0
790.0
28.0
6.1
4.0 3.2 8.9 4.4 17.0
23.0 8.9
84.Q
1 4.0

mg/L
.9 .5

N02+N03

or t hoP(J4
.12 .21

lab alk
783 659

1.1
1 2.0 7.1 7.9 8.3
1 1.0
3.6 1 7.0
5.3 8.5 7.2
2.6 2.0
.4 3.2 7.1
.6 8.9 7.6 2.3

,07
.01 .01 .01 <.01 .01
.01 .01 .01 .01 .01
<.Q1 <.Q1
.01 .05 .06
1.10 .01 .01 .12

.04 --
--__
-__
.15 .18 .06 .U9 .06

403
130 650 570 630 130
210 130
86 140 300
180 73
500 210 120
41 120 920 360

1 .7 5.5 1 7.0 1 4.0
5.7
5.5
.2
.1 1 .1 1.2
.4 .2
6.0 .5
1 2.0
3.6

.01 .01 <.Q1 .31
.15
.04
.02
.41 .01 <.01 .57 .92
<.Q1 .07 .01
.02

,06 ,15 .12 .15 ,15 .09
.03 .03
,09
,0o

410 70
190 510
400
670
130
150 250 280 210 160
550 170 170
64

Table 2. --Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

Sample
ID ID ID ID ID
MT 1 MT 2 NT 3 MT 4 MT 5
MT 6 MT 7 MT £ MT 5 MT1 C
MT1 1 MT1 2 -J MT 1 3 IS) i1Tl 4 NV 1
NV 2 NV 3 NV 5 NV 6A NV 63
NV 7 NV 8 NV 9 NVl 0 NV1 1
rivi2 NVl 3 NV1 4 NVl 5 NV1 6
NV1 7 NV1 8 NV1 9 NV20 NV21
NV22 NV23 NV24 NV25A NV250

hard tot
930 2,900
320
5 150
o? 74
3
640 10 8 23 60
1,000 5
42 1,100
25
10 5
19G 120

Al ug/L
20 70

As ug/L

20
<50 2 70 2
<50 3o <50 52 <50 1 5
100 20 <50 d <50 7 <50 17 <5U 3
300 140 <50 7 <50 45 30U 26
20
30 __ 3G -10 -10 19

220 10 180 20
3 90 2 17u

330 10

UO 10

140 <50

210 <5U

2

250 00 13

230 1U

210 <50.

5

290 <50

5

160 10 23U <50

a

37 <50 20

11 4U

Ba ug/L
80.DO 40.00
80.UO
10. UO 500.00
70.00 50. GO
5.00
50.00 7.00 5.UO
70.00 70.00
30. UO 7.UO
300.00 30.00 8.50
.72 4.90 360.00 1 50.00

Be ug/L
<20.00 <20.00
00.OU
<1 .00 1 .00 3. 00 3.00
0 .00
3.00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .OU 0 .00
1 .00 0 .00 <1 .00
3.00 <.58
<.1 1 <.28 3.60 <.59

37.00 120.DO
<2.40 <4.oO
730.00
160.uO
100.GO
100.00 400.00 240.00 100.00
50.00
19U.L/G 100.OU
50.00
4.uO

<.66 <3.3U
.58 < .99
1 .70
O .00
O .00
O .00 <.37 <.34
0.00 O .00
O .00 O .00
<.29

B ug/L
85U.O 90.0
1,000.0
700.0 7,000.0
300.0 300.0 500.0
100.0 300.0 300.0 300.0 100.0
700.0 50.0
700.0 3UO.O 720.0
9.5 130.0 410.0 380.0

Cd ug/L O O
O

Cr ug/L <50.00 <60.00 <35.00
<.85 0.70
<.86

Co ug/L <50.UU <60.00 <35.00
1 .50 .20 .54
2.50 1 .50

Cu ug/L 00.00 05.00 00.00
2.10 .65
1 .40 <3.60 O .90

800.0 3,600.0
130.0 1,200.0
>2,500.0
810.0
70.0
3U.O 37.0 40.0 50.0 100.3
1,000.0 50.0
1,000.0
1 20.0

<.97 38.00
1 .10
<2.50 O .50
1 .80 .94
20
<.43

<.97 6.90 1 .20 2.30
4.00
2.70

<2.10 16.00
2.20 <3.20
5.80
3.70

1.50 .69
1 .90
.68

1 .30 1.30
<2.60
1 .40

Sample
10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 I0 6
MT 1 MT 2 MT 3 MT 4 MT 5
MT 6 MT 7 MT 8 MT 9 MT1 0
MT1 1 MT12 MT1 3 MT1 4 NV 1
NV 2 NV 3 NV 5 NV 6A NV 68
NV 7 NV 8 NV 9 NV1 0 NV1 1
NV1 2 NV13 NV1 4 NV1 5 NV1 6
NV1 7 NV18 NV19 NV20 NV21
NV22 NV23 NV24 NV25A NV25d

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

Ga ug/L <20.00 <50.uO <20.0C
<1 .90 <.36 5.80
<3.6G <1 .90

Ge ug/L <100.00 <100.UO <70,00
<3 ,9U <.75 A.90 8.60
<4.00

Fe ug/L
1,100 2x700
400
50 20 80 580 20
170 20 10 10 80
50 10 20 170 20
20 10 30 50

Pb ug/L
<70.0 <9G.O
<50.0
14.0 7.0 3.0 2.0 4.0
3.0 5.0 2.0 <1 .0 16.0
1 .0 1 .0 4.0 7.0 <fa.5
<1 .6 <4.1 O7.0 36.0

Li ug/L
350 1 10
900
500 1,000
500 700 300
300 500
70 300
70
100 50
300 300 400
<1 1 41 0 1,100 560

N n ug/L
70.0 1 30.0
140.0
<10.0 1 7C.O
10.0 10.0 <10.0
60.0 <10.0 <10.0
30.0 20.0
30.0 <10.0
40.0 20.0 12.0
1.5 10.0 94.0 110.0

Hg ug/L
<.1 <.1 <.1 <-1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1
<.1

Mo ug/L
20.0 30.0
<15.0
70.0 30.0 50.0 70.0 70.0
30.0 70.0 70.0 100.0 50.0
50.0 30.0 10.0 50.0 53.0
3.3 14.0 <3.6 <1 .9

Nd ug/L
' --
<39.0 <7.5
<19.0 <76.0 <39.0

Ni ug/L <50.00 <60.00 <35.00
.. --
<3.90 <.75
<1.90 <7.60 <3.90

<2.1U 11 .00 14.00
5.20
<5.5G
<3.30

<4.40 <23.00
15.00 15.00
14.00
<6.80

1.20 1 .1 0
<2.60
4.20

<2.50 <2.3-0
8.00
<2.00

20 <9.7

870

20 2 30 . 0 4,900

40 <7.5

900

80 <1 5.0 3,000

30 <25.0 7,500

20 <15.0

870

10 <1 .0

.30

10 2.0 30 <1 .0 220 <5.0 10 3.0
20 1 .0

10 92 1 10 30 10

50 <12.0 2x400

10 3.0

30

10 1.U 300

2U <4.3

180

<4.4 48.0 <3.5 <6.7
60.0
50.0
00.0
10.0 7.6 6.5
<10.0 <10.0
13.0 <10.0
20.0
<2.0

< .1 .1

3.4 18.0 <1 .7
8.9
<5.5
6.7
<10.0
<10.0
2.3
2.4 <10.0 1 00.0
6.6 10.0 30.0
51 .0

<44.Q <230.U
<35.0 <67.0
<120.0
<68.0

<4.40 <23.00
<3.50 <6.70
<12.00
<6.80

<25.0 <23.0
<55.0
<20.U

<2.50 <2.30
<5.50
<2.00

Sample
ID ID ID ID ID 6
MT 1 MT 2 MT 3 MT 4 MT 5
MT 6 MT 7 MT 8 MT 9 MT1 0
MT1 1 MT1 2 MT1 3 MT 1 4 NV 1
NV 2 NV 3 NV 5 NV 6A NV 63
NV 7 NV 8 NV 9 NV1C NV1 1
NV1 2 NV1 3 NV1 4 NV15 NV1 6
NV1 7 NV1 8 NV19. NV20 NV21
NV22 NV23 NV24 NV25A NV259

Table 2.--Analyses of water samules from 163 springs in the 'western States continued

Sc uy/L

Se uy/L

Ag ug/L <7.00
<10.00
<5.00

<.85
.45 .70
<.97 <A.9U
.90 <1 .50 <2.50 <1 .50
<.50
1 .30

<1
1 O

< .09 .02
<.04 <.17 < .09
<.08 <.15 <.25
<.05 <.05
<.

S r ug/L
2/000.0 3*900.0
2/200.0
300.0 3/000.0 3/000.0 3/OOG.O
100.0
3/000.0 100.0 10G.O 500.0 3UO.O
5/000.0 50.0
5UO.O 5/OuO.G
12U.O
2.6 29.0 560.0 620.0

W ug/L
<39.0 <1 .6
09.0 07.0 <39.0

V ug/L <30.0 <40.0 <25 .0
<Z.7 2.3
<1 .3 <5 .3 <27.0

Yb ug/L
<.090 .020 .1 10
<.170 <.086

Y ug/L
1.50 .29 .78
3.30 <1 .30

Zn ug/L
10.0 20.0
00.0
7. <5,
7. 7, <5.0
10.0 <5.0
5.0 7.0 5.0
30.0 10.0 10.0 10.0 09.0
<3.6
<36.0 <19.0

Zr ug/L 000.00 OOO.OO <70.00
<3.90 <.75
<1 .90 14.00 <4.00

550.0 3/400.0
26.0 33.0
600.0
2/20U.O
100.0
100.0 220.0 43G.O 300.0 300.0
1 /OOO.O 300.0 700.0
160.0

<9.7 <230.0
<35.0 110.0 O20.0 <68.0
<5.4 <23.0
<55.0
51 .0

<31 .0 <16.0
<2.4
0.1
<47.0
<1 .7 O .6
<38.0

< .097 .640
<.080 <.150 <.250
.160
<.050 <.050
.120
.050

<1 .50 10.00 <1 .10
3.30 <3.80
5.90
1.10 .99
2.70
<.64

21 .0 O 10.0
O7.0 <32.0
<55.0
<33.0
10.0
10.0 27.0 <1 1 .0 10.0 10.0
<26.0 30.0 <5.0
<9.4

<4.40 <23.00
7.50 <6.70 <12.00 <6.80
<2.50 <2.30
<5.50
<2.00

OOOO O O I I I
Oinrg-O <O >? I I | '-II''

Illll Illll

Illll Illll

I IOI I OIOI I
l|«l| cOlinll «- in »III

I I I OO
I I I >] rv) r- rvj

OOOOO
>»»">>»«- O | »- | «- «-

OOOOO
*O O >» « r>J I «- «-

OOOOOOOOO

I r\l O >» O rgiNioo-OoO

( TO in r\j

..... 1/1 r- r>. r>»

Illll l||ll

Illll Illll

Illll Illll

Illll Illll

III III

IIIOO
iiloo
OO fO

IIOOO i» O I I I
i i *- %r N. ooiii
^ >^ O» f^ O*

Illll
11111

Illll
liiii

Ollll
oiiii
f

Illll
11111

OI I I I
01111
co

IO-O&-O I r\j <O .- in

>» O O O O >O tn O oo ro

OO I I I OM I I I

IOIOO I O I » ft
co r- *

IOOOO I O O >» O

OIOI I OIOI I

O I s» in * O I fx- O> r-

O O O >V< m o oo r\J Ki K>

O O t1- O> O <O O - O> >»

OOOOO fOOmor-
VV
ff

OOOOO rorvjOOO
VVVV
T- *r r- fM

OOOO"> i\JO>Oi/ir\j
VV
<O«

OOOOO <OOOOin
V VV
>» fOfNj

OOOOO KiOOOO
V\\«\
»-OJOK>I/>

OOOOO OOOOO
VV«V\
ooiAOin<O

OOOOO OiAfOOO
\\VV
Oryj,-^-

OOOOO DOO^O*.

V«*
<O>OO-

V
*

OOOi/iO OfO*->OO

V\
iniM

V
r\l

cn i ca

lujtriiAin IOOOO

inc>OOO Oi\J(\jKlr\j

oOO-OOoO T-r\jfOKlf\J

OOOO OO^OO ODOOO OOOOO OOOOO OOOOO OOOO3

. s» i oj ri

33 O OO M <O OO O » (M INI O
OOOO

«r ro «t CD -; -n z 2 z zzzsz zoooo ooooo ooooo ooooo ooooo ooooo
75

Table 2.. --Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

Sairple
NV26 NV2 7 NV28 NV29 NV3Q
NV3 1 NV32 NV33 iJ V 3 4 NV35
NV36 NM 1 NM 2 NM 3 NM 4
NM 5 UT 1 UT 2 UT 3 UT 4
UT 5A OT 50 UT 6 UT 7 UT «
UT 9A OT 98 UT1 C UT1 1 OT1 2
OT1 3 UT1 4 UT1 5 UT1 6 UT1 1
OT1 d UT1 9 UT20 UT21 OT22
UT23 UT24 UT25 OT26 UT27

R* pCi/L Ra 228
<.1 Q .09 .40
7.30 .20
.10 .07 11 .00 .90 .20
4.50 230.00
3.40 .29 .48
20.00 32.00
4.20 .09 .30
2.00 220.00
3.10 2 .90 53.00
75. OU 120.00
66.00 21.00 74.00
5.00 .20 .26 .31 .18
130.00 5.30 1 .60 .74 9.10
3.60 .10 .21 .22
1 .30

U ug/L
.03 12.00 120.00
.90 < .01
1 .40 .22
6.80 .02
14.00
.04 .60 1 .40 1 .60 .39
.04 .80 1 .90 2.70 1.90
2.30 1 .50 1 . 70 2.00 1.50
<.01 .06 .04 .28 .08
1 .40 .39 .50
1 .90 1 .40
.17 110.00
4.7Q 3.10 1 1 .00
.15 1 5.00
3.10 .21
2.00

Rn pC i/L
-400 1 ,100 110/000 82U
77 90U
---
__ -1 ,300 660 2,300
5,600 1 ,400
--
-
-2,500 6,500
50U 4,600
2,000 __
1,200 2,200 1,500
._ 260
-310 140
1 ,800 12,000
49 170 2,800
240 2,100
200 19
52J

He ppb
------
__ -----
_--__ --
__ --__ --
--
----
2,600 __
13/OUO ---
__ __ -2,600
0
3,200 >90 510 58 410
1 ,300 120 870 -60 840

REF
<9.80 .02 .01
24.00 >59.00
.21 .94 4.80 130.00 .04
330.00 1,100.00
7 .20 .53
3.60
1,500.00 120.00 6.50 .10 .47
2.60 430.00
5 .40 4.30 100.00
>22,000.00 5,900.00 4,900.00 220.00 2,700.00
1 1 .00 .66
1 .50 .48 .38
2,300.00 .16
1 .00 .70
2.40
71 .00 .02 .20
3. 10 1 .90

Ra/Spcon
<.1 90 .100 .530
6.700 .130
.190 .046 2.600 .530 .069
6.300 38.000
2.500 .450
1 .100
36.000 2.300 4.200 .026 .1 40
1 .200 4.200
.140 .220 1 .200
2.100 3.400 2.200 1 .400 4.600
.170 .093 .180 .240 .360
5.000 .850 .180
1 .300 7.&00
.670 .047 .410 1 .300 .540

UEF
>.1000 45.0000 100.0000
.0420 <.0170
4.7000 1 .1000
.2100 .0075 24.0000
.0030 .0009 .1 400 1 .9000 .2800
.0007 .0085 .1500 10.0000 2.1000
.3900 .0023 .1900 .2300 .0096
<.0001 .0002 .0002 .0045 .0004
.0950 1 .5000
.6500 2.1000 2.6000
.0004 6.4000 1.0000 1 .4000
.4100
.0140 51.0000
5.0000 .3200 .5200

U/spcon
.0570 13.0000 160.0000
.8300 <.0064
2.7000 .1400
1 .6000 .0120
4.8000
.0560 .1000 1 .0000 2.5000 .9200
.0710 .0570 1 .9000 .7700 .8800
1 .3000 .0290 .0770 .1500 .0330
<.0003 .0017 .0013 .0190 .0050
.0470 .4300 .3500 1.5000 2.8000
.0065 16.0000
.5200 5.5000 9.4000
.0280 7.0000 6.1000 1 .3000
.8300

SiOZ mgL
-33.0 48.0 34.Q 42.0
21.0 83. 0 13.0 53.0 44.0
98.0 5.8
--_
__ 25.0
-37.0 17.0
__ 27.0 27.0 22.0 24.0
36.0 --
33.0
--
33.0 --
19.0 12.0 11.0
34.0 25.0 21.0 18.0 12.0
60.0 3.3
21 .0 15.0 22.0

Ca mg/L
92.0 60.0 26.0 43.0
48.0 18.0 120.0 48.0 140.0
14.0 230.0
----
__ 220.0
-110.0
74.0
__ 800.0 260.0 210.0 700.0
740.0 --
910.0 --
510.0 --
54.0 74.0 56.0
730.0 610.0 290.0
63.0 74.0
390.0 170.0
54.0 21 .0 76.0

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States--continued

Sa*ple
NV26 NV27 NV2S MV29 NV3C
,'JV31 UV32 NVJ3 NV34 NV35
NV36 NM 1 ,'JM 2 NM 3 .NM 4
NM 5 OT 1 UT 2 UT 3 UT 4
UT 5A UT 53 UT 6 UT 7 UT S.
OT 9A UT 98 UT10 UT1 1 UT1 2
UT1 3 UT1 4 UT1 5 UT16 UT1 7
UT18 UT19 UT20 UT21 UT22
UT23 UT24 UT25 UT26 UT27

Mg my / L
23.U 23.0
.1 3.3
a.9
.3 44 .U
3.4 o1 .0
.2 23.U
56.U
53.0 35.U
18G.O 15U.O 1 10.0 220.0
330.0
25.0
130.0
24.0 34.0 20.0
200.0 140.0 1 10.0
13.0 35.0
53.0 33,0 17.0
3 .9 41 .0

N a mg/L
67.0 64.0 200.0 320.0
27.0 290.0 780.0 340.0 340.0
160.0 980.0

mg/L HC03 mgL C03 mg/L

1.6 9.1 2.2 16.0
2.2 10.0 o8.0 23.0 19.0
5.4 190.0

244 366
38 110
1 71 68
740 320 1 50
370 721

S04 mg/L
210.0 52.0
380.0 590.0
63.0 250.0 430.0 490.0 220.0
20.0 43.0

Cl mg/L
09.0 28.0 49.0 73.0
8.7 250.0 830.0
57.0 720.0
15.0 1,500.0

2,900.0

140.0

302

<1

500.0 310.0

38.0 17.0

210 282

15/000.0 4,700.0 3,100.0
12,000.0
9,000.0
6,300.0

780.0 200.0 1 20.0 590.0
490.0
370.0

471 310 261 530
443
195

6,900.0

220.0

253

<1

110.0 140.0
20.0

12.0 2.1 1.2

173 305 244

7,300.0 650.0
1 ,700.0 27.0
10C.O

250.0 10.0
93.0 2.0 6.1

1 40
219 427 134 195

850.0 190.0
29.0 7.7
370.0

59.0 7.5 4.0 1 .4
36.fJ

150
293 232
70 256

95.0
90.0 39.C
470.0 180.0 130.0 300.0
79.0
180.0

5,000.0
96C.O 490.0
26,000.0 7,700.0 5,400.0
21,000.0
17,000.0
12,000.0

570.0
88.0 67.0 21 .0
600.0 330.0 490.0 110.0 130.0
700.0 97.0 54 .0 5.9
320.0

12,000.0
180.0 210.0
24.0
12,000.0 2,100.0 3,000.0 32.0 180.0
1 ,500.0 440.0 20.0 7.6 450.0

mg/L N02+N03 orthoP04 lab alk

.5 .4 8.4 8.8
.4 9.5 8.6 8.6 1.1
1 4.0 .4

.78 .22 .01 .03
<.01 .01
1 .10 .01
1 .90
.02 .03

--.12 .03
..
.12 .06 .06
.09 .03

200 300
31 90
140 56
610 260 120
300 591

1.2 .01
.4 .63 .4 1.70

1.3 .9 .7
1 .4
.9
3.7
.4
1 .1 .2 .2
1.9 .4 .8 .2 .9
2.7 .9 .7 .2
1 .1

.11 1 .40 3.4Q
.16
.04
.02
.01
.04 1.20
.11
.01 1 .90
.01 .09 .11
.01 .75 .68 .09 .1 1

09 06
.28 .15 .09 .25 .28 .18
21
15

248
172 231
386 254 214 435
363
160
208
142 250 200
140 130 350 110 160
120 240 190
59 210

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

S amp Ie

NV26 NV27 NV28 NV29 NV30

NV31 NV32 NV33 NV34 NV35

fW36 NM 1 f4M 2
Nf1 3 HP 4

NK 5

UT 1

-J 03

UT 2 UT 3

UT 4

UT 5A UT 58 UT 6 UT 7
UT 6.

UT 9A UT 9B UT1C UT1 1 UT12

UT1 3 UT14
UT15 UT16 UT17

UT18 UT19
UT2Q UT21 UT22

UT23 UT24
UT25 UT26 UT27

hard tot
320 240
65 120
160 46
4SC 130 600
36 670
780
490 330
2/700 1/300
980 2/700
3/200
2/200
1,800
230 320 22U
2/600 2/100 1/2UO
210 330
1/200 560 200 6? 360

Al uy/L

As ug/L

100 300
20 20
100 7 <50 19
40 10

60

150
50 20
1/200 200 130 870
1/400
370
270
20 100 100
10 1/000
500 <50 100
50 100
50 <50 100

23
20
--
1 <1
65 1 7
<1 <1
20 3 2 1
17

Ba ug/L
50.00 70.00 1 5.UO 21 .00
70. UU 7.00
27. uG 40.00 47.00
120. UO 430.00

Be ug/L
<1 .00 <1 .00
<.55 <.88
<1.00 <1 .00 <2.10
<.98 <1.30
1 .70 <7.00

4/500.UO
50.00
400.00 . 100.GO
200.uO 400.00
7,600.00
500.00
100.00
70.00 70.00 70.00
120. UO 70. UO 30.00 30.00 50.00
95.00 10.00 100.00 30.00 30. UO

<1U.CO
<3.00 <2.00
<50.0C <20.CO <10.00 <40.00
<30.00
<70.00
<30.0C
<1 .OU <1.00
7.00
1 .00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
<1 .00
<1 .00
0 .00
<1 .00
0.00

B ug/L
100.0 70.0
>810.0 1/100.0
50.0 3/000.0 >3/100.0
590.0 1/700.0
99.0 13/000.0

Cd ug/L <1

Cr ug/L
.30
<3.10 2.20
<2.00 1 .20
<25.00

Co ug/L
.60 .30
4.70 2.30 5.90 1 .20 <25.00

Cu ug/L
3.50 <2.90
11.00 3.60 7.10
<1.70 <5.00

800.0
200.0 150.0
4/000.0 1/500.0 1/000.0 4/000.0
3/100.0
2/800.0
1/100.0
180.0 100.0
50.0
1/600.0 300.0
1/000.0 50.0
100.0
520.0 100.0
70.0 30.0 500.0

<1

<40.00

<40.00

20.00

00.00 OO.OO

00.UO <10.00

<3.00 <2.00

070.00 <70.00 <40.00
<1 50.00
020.00
<300.00

<1 70.00 <70.00 <40.00
<1 50.00
<120.00
<300.00

<45.00 <20.00 <10.00 <40.00
<30.00
<65.00

<100.00 00.00

000.00 OO.OO

<20.00 <1.00

<24.00

<24.00

<52.00

<1

<20.00

<20.UO

<5.00

Sample
NV26 NV27 NV28 NV29 NV30
NV31 NV32 NV33 NV34 NV35
NV36 NM 1 NM 2 NM 3 NM 4
NM 5 UT 1 UT 2 UT 3 UT A
UT 5A UT 53 UT 6 UT 7 UT 8
UT 9A UT 93 UT10 UT1 1 UT12
UT13 UT1 t, UT15 UT16 UT17
UT18 UT19 UT20 UT21 UT22
UT23 UT24 UT25 UT26 UT27

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States--continued

Ga ug/L
2.10 <2.90
<6.SC <3.20 <4.30 <1 .70 00.00

G e ug/L
<3.70 <6.00
O4.00 <6.60 <9. 10 6.40
<35.00

Fe ug/L
<!o
20 10U
60 <1 U 410
70 3U
40 <35

Pb uj/L
35.0 5.0
<o. 1 03.0
0 .0 0 .0 <51 .0 <14 .0 <20.0
<7.7 <i:5 .0

Li uq/L
10 3b 1,100 1,30U
30 500 6,200 4,800 1,50U
1,100 13,000

Mn us/L
2.0 1.0 6.6 92.0
130.0 7.0
53.0 330.0
<9.1
92.0 30.0

Hg ug/L
<.1 <.1
<.1 <.1

Mo ug/L
<10.0 30.0 76.0 7.8
10.0 1u.O 37.0 <3.2
7.1
2.2 20.0

Nd ug/L
<37.0 <60.U
__
O40.U <66.0 <91 .U <35.0 --

Ni ug/L
^ <3.70 <6.00
.. -04.00 <6.60 <9.10
<3.50 <25.00

<2Q.OO <5.00 <4.00
<90.00 <30.0U <20.0U <30.00 <60.00 <130.00
<50.0U <2.00
<52.00

<50.00 <20.00 <10.00
<220.00 <60.00 <50.00
<200.00 <140.00 <600.00
<110.00 <5.00
<110.00

<10.UO

<20.00

200
20
1,300 100 <20
1,500
400
5,000
<50
<2u 10 10
190 350 120
10 20
12U 10 2U 30 20

<4U.O
<1U.O <10.0
< 1 7U.0 <70.0 <4U.C
<1 50.0
24.0
1 .0
OuG.G
00.0 <1 .0 0 .0
<1 .0 2.0
0 .0 O .0 <1 .0
0 .0 <1 .0 <1 .0 0 .0 0 .0

1 ,300
220 150
7,100 2,100 1 ,400 5,600
4,800
9,800
2,300
40 50 10
1 1,000 100
1,OOC 10 50
900 50 3U
<10 50U

20.0
<10.0 <10.0
90.0 60.0 60.0 90.0
100.G
1,700.0
90.0
3.0 00.0 00.0
210.0 40.0 50.0
00.0 10.0
310.0 00.0 00.0 00.0 00.0

<.1 <.1
.1 9.0 <.1 <.1 <.1
.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1

1UO.O
20.0 15.0
380.0 1 10.0
90.0 3dO.O
160.0
260.0
170.0
10.0 00.0
oo.o
<52.0 10.0 10.0
00.0 00.0
40.0
oo.o
00.0 00.0
oo.o

2,OOO.U

<40.00 <10.00 <10.00
<170.00 <70.00 <40.00
<150.00 <120.00 <300.00
<100.00 <10.00
<110.00
<20.00

Sample
?J V I 6 NV27 NV28 NV29 NV3G
NV31 NV32 NV33 NV34 NV35
NV36 NM 1 NM 2 NH 3 NM 4
NM 5 UT 1 UT 2 UT 3 UT 4
UT 5A UT 58 UT 6 UT 7 UT 8
UT 9A UT 93 UT1 0 UT1 1 UT1 2
UT1 3 UT1 4 UT1 5 UT16 UT1 7
UT18 UT19 UT2C UT21 UT22
UT23 UT24 UT25 UT26 UT27

Table 2. --Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

Sc ug/L

Se ug/L

Ag ug/L

1 .40
<3.10 <1 .40 <2.20
<.77

< .08
.26 <.08 <.30

Sr ug/L
1 /OOO.O 700.0
1/100.0 2/100.0
500.0 300.0 2/200.0 1/700.0 3/500.0
340.0 1/300.0

W ug/L
190.0 130.0
<1 40.0 <66.0 <91 .0 120.0

V ug/L
<2.6 <4.2
<10.0 <4 .6 7.5 <2.5
<25.0

Yb ug/L
<.080 <.130
<.310 <.140 <.200 <.080

Y ug/L
<1.20 2.60
8.10 2.90 <3.00 1.20

Zn ug/L
<5.0 <5.0 <18.0 <29.0
700.0 <5.0
<68.0 36.0
<43.0
<17.0 10.0

Zr ug/L
<3.70 <6.00
<14.00 <6.60 <9.10 <3.50
<35.00

<24.00

<5.00 <2.00 <1 .00
<20.00 <7.00 <5.00
<17.00 <13.00 <30.00
<10.00 <1 .00
<2 .40
<2.00

9/300.0
2/400.0 1 /700.0
38/000.0 1 1 /OOO.O
8/200.0 32/000.0
30/000.0
24/000.0
d/000.0
1 /500.0 300.0 300.0
13/000.0 7/000.0 5/000.0 500.0 1 /OOO.O
5/400.0 1 /OOO.O
300.0 100.0 1 /OOO.O

__ --
---
__
<240.0
--

<30.0 <10.0 <10.0
<130cO <50.0 <30.0 <90.0
<200.0
<70.0 <5.0
<76.0
<20.0

__ __ --

-__

2.400

<36.00

30.0
<10.0 <10.0
50.0 40.0 30.0 40.0
30.0
20.0

<70.00
<20.00 <10.00
<300.00 <100.00
<70.00 <260.00
<200.00
<440.00

40.0
<10.0 5.0
<5.0
30.0 10.0 10.0 . <5.0 10.0
20.0 5.0
<5.0 <5.0 <5.0

<150.00 <6.00
<110.00
<30.00

San-0 le
UT28 UT29 UT3C UT31 UT32
UT33 UT34 UT35 UT36A UT363
UT37 UT33 UT39 UT4C UT4 1
00 UT43 UT44 WY 1 WY 2 WY 3
WY 4 WY 5 WY 6 WY 7 WY 8
WY 9 WY1 0A WY 1CB

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western Stotes continued

LATITUOE
39 24 13 39 24 1 2 39 22 16 39 21 5 39 20 3
39 16 27 39 1 5 10 39 14 50 39 14 19 39 1 4 14
39 1 3 43 39 10 19 39 6 24 39 5 18 38 33 21
38 10 22 37 11 21 43 39 54 43 39 18 43 39 1 7
43 34 56 43 22 12 43 13 1 43 1 7 20 43 0 25
42 49 54 41 29 33 41 29 33

LONblTUO

11316 38 11351 42 11318 55 1 13 30 50 11217 48

11217 50 1 13 52 25 11211 51 1 1 1 39 19 1 1 1 39 23

111 50 1 1 1 42 11212 1 12 24 112 5

35 9
54 34 51

11312 13 11316 16 108 11 41 108 11 52 108 11 37

108 12 45 1 1C 26 4 1 11046 28 1 1 u 33 5 108 50 6

1 10 59 57 107 32 43 107 32 43

f ootnote
.3 .3 .3 .3 .3
.3 .3 .3 43. 1 --
__ -.3 .3 44.9
36.9 2.9 .1 .1 --
__ .9 .9 -.1
.1 ---

date ymd
790*423 790,420 79u,422 790,422 790,424
790,424 790,420 79U,425 76U,503 760,503
760,503 760,503 . 790,425 790,425 750,721
750,723 750,723 760,625 760,625 760,624
7611,625 760,627 760,627 760,626 760,623
760,627 760,622 760,622

temp C
9 19
& 27
6
9 22
7 11 14
15 12 11 15 74
59 42 53 34 56
20 35 41
8 38
62 12 10

pH fid
7.6 7.0 7.8 7.4 7.7
7.2 7.4 7.5 7.8 7.2
7.6 7.8 7.3 6.9 6.8
8.0 6.6 6.4 7.6 6.3
7.1 7.9 7.2 7.5 7.9
7.0 8.0 7.1

spc fid
770 800 770 1 ,580 900
590 800 750 5 ,600 3 ,100
1 ,030 1 ,490
530 1 ,540 3 ,800
2 ,200 15 ,000
3 ,050 3 ,200 3 ,000
1 ,180 930
1 ,630 1 ,630 1 ,120
7 ,700 2 ,080 1 ,560

70S sum
382 449 4Q7 969 523
331 470 426 3,120
__ -300 1,150 --
__ -2,270 2,330 --
__ ---728
5,480 --

TOS ROE

do
a. so
5.00 5.50 2.70 7.30
7.30 o.40 8.00 1 .70

Eh mv
120 110 110 120 100
110 -170
90 -350

7.50 5.50 2.20

100
120 -130

Table 2.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

Samp Ie Ra pCi/L Ra 228 U U9/L

Rn pCi/L He ppb

UT23 UT29 UT30 UT31 UT32

.08 2.5'0
.11 1 .20
.15

2.00 3. 10 1 .10 2.60 1 .30

100 0 21 3/000
370 30 260 700 420 0

UT33 UT34 UT35 UT36A UT36D
UT37 UT38 UT39 UT4G U T41
oo UT43
UT44 WY 1 WY 2 WY 3
WY 4 WY 5 UY 6 WY 7 WY 3
WY 9 WY10A WY1C8

.1 3 .33 ,0o 33.00 4.00
.49 .22 .08 .07 6.30
7.50 41 .00 15.00 13.00 15.00
3.50 1 .80 3.10
.34 61 .GO
31.00 .47 .36

.50 3.40 1 .00
.02 .10
1 .60 A. 70
.35 1 .30
.U3
<.05 .00 .10 .05 .10
2.80 .10 .20 .80 .03
'.04
.10 .07

36 J>0 641) 870
95 0 100 4t>0
-- --
__ __ -- -1 1U 60 29 -710 1 /400
60U __ 550 --
----
__ __ -- --- --
---
__ _ _ -- --

REF
.12 2.40
.30 1 .40
.25
.77 .72 .18 1 ,600.00 120.00
.90 .14 .67 .16 620.00
>440.00 200.00 440.00
1x100.00 440.00
3.70 53.00 46.00
1 .30 6/000.00
2/300.00 14.00 15.00

Ra/Spc on
.100 3.1 00
.1 40 .760 .1 70
.220 1 .000
.080 6.800 1 .300
.480 .1 50 .1 50 .046 1 .700
3.400 2.700 4.900 5.600 5.000
3.000 1 .900 1 .900
.210 54.000
4.000 .230 .230

UEF
8.5000 .4200
3.4UOO .7300
4.1000
1 .3UOO 1 .4000 5.7000
.0006 .0085
1.1000 7.2000 1.5000 6.300C
.0016
<.0023 .0050 .0023 .0009 .0023
.2700 .0190 .0220 .3000 .0002
.0004 .0720 .0660

U/spcon
2.6000 3.9000 1 .4000 1 .6000 2.0000
.8500 4.3000 1 .3000
.0130 .0320
1.6000 3.2000
.6600 .8400 .0079
<.0230 .0400 .0330
. .0160 .0330
2.4000 .1100 .1200 .4900 .0270
.0052 .0430 .0450

Si02 mgL
11.0 17.0
8.9 22.0 49.0
28.0 19.0 10.0 15.0
--
__ -24.0 11.0 --
-. -33.0 34.0 --
-.
--34.0
36.0 --

Ca mg/L
54.0 68.0 40.0 71.0 83.0
77.0 75.0 98.0 45.0
--
__ -65.0 250.0 --
--370.0 370.0 --
_---140.0
410.0 ---

*"" ""*

~

829

9V*

10*>

9'f

O'OOS' I

221

er

10*>

6*2

0*f V

5'2

8 » 4> /

2f9 029

52* 12-

1100**>>

5*f ff

0'05f O'Olf

Vf ~~

8-V "

0*f

012 OV2

12* 1 * V2" 2*

0*V9 0'8l

-- -- --

09l'l 092 052 082
Off 081 081 072 Of2
11 P Pel

Vf 70doquo

91* fV VO92*
0262** V
Ovif*'I
62*
fON+20N

2'2 I* 9*
r f* ft
2* 2* 2*
1/6iu j

0*001' I 0*9V 0'95 0*1 I
0*99 O'Of 2 0*001 00**V699
-)/6iu 13

O'OOf'l O'OLf
--
0*062 0*062
0*0f9 1*8 --
0*91 0* 15 0*V8 2*8 0*22 0*082 0*2f 0*V9 0*92 -)/6iu vOS

__ --

l>

228

0*051

O'OOf I

l>

912

0*5 I

0*2V

_~

-- --

--

~~ -- --

" *"" ~ ~-

l> l> __

122 952 --

00**0f55 --

0'022 0*092 --

. _ --

--

l> l>

952 f62

8*1 I* I

O0*'2VVl

::

l> l> l> l>
l> l> l> i> l>
1/5iu fO 3

02V I 2 If 50f IVf
20V 612 612 f 62 082
l6iu 703H

08**161 6*5 8*
0*f 05**112 8*5 2* I
T / 6 UP Si

0o**n0v02' I
00**68V
0*P2 00**80202 0*95 0*25
1 / 6 111 P M

ujajsan

in sButjds £91

"*2

0*89
n* vc
---
0* V2 0*22
0*51 0* V2
0*f2 0*12 00**P0?f 0*25 00**252f 00**6622
T / fill! fil.1

PO UM VOl AM
6 AM
8 AM 2 AM 9 AM 5 AM V AM
f AH 2 AM I AM
win f vin
i vin ovin. 6f in 8fin 2f in
09f in V9fin Sf in vf in f fin
2f in if in Df in 62in R2in
a i rim p c-

GO

Table 2. Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

S a up le
UT23 UT29 UT3C UT31 UT32
UT33 UT34 UT35 UT36A UT363
UT37 UT33 'UT39 UT40 UT4 1
UT43 UT44 WY 1 WY 2 WY 3
WY 4 WY 5 WY 6 WY 7 WY 8
WY 9 WY10A WY1 OB

hard tot
250 290 21U 320 420
31U 310 330 210

AL ug/L
100 100 100 100 300
100 100 <50
70

As ug/L
1
5 <1 16
1
<1 7
<1 --

260 690
1*200 1*200

70
300 1
300 170

490 1 *3UO

10 40

Ba ug/L
30. uO 50. UO 30.00 30.00 500.00
50. UO 100.00
7U.uO 800.00

Be ug/L
<1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00
<1 .00 <1 .00 <1 .00 <10.00

100.00 10.UO 50.UO
50.UO 50.00

.00 .00 .00
<20.00 <20.00

50.00 50.00

<5.0G <30.00

B ug/L
. 50.0 70.0 70.0
300.0 70.0
30.0 100.0
70.0 1 *500.0

Cd ug/L <1

Cr ug/L <55.00

Co ug/L <55.00

Cu ug/L <12.00

30.0 100.0 3*000.0
500.0 500.0

<45.00 <45.00

<45.00 <45.00

<10.00 <10.00

100.0 1*500.0

<15.00 <90.00

<15.00 <90.0U

<4.00 <2C.OO

Sa rrp I e

UT2S UT29 UT30 UT31 UT32

UT33 UT34 UT35 UT36A UT36B
UT37 UT3£ UT39 UTAC UTA 1

UT43

00 Ul

UT44 WY 1

WY 2

WY 3

WY 4 WY 5 WY 6 WY 7 WY 8

WY 9
WY1 OA
WYI ua

Table 2. --Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western States continued

Ga ug/L <30.GO

Ge ug/L <100.00

Fe ug/L
10 10 10 2U 10
20 30 40 60

Pb uc,/L
<1 .0 <1 .0 <1 .0 <1 .0 <1 .0
<1 .0 <1 .0 <1 .0 <35.0

Li ug/L
30 70 30 300 30
10 50 30 180

Mn ug/L
00.0 00.0 00.0 00.0
10.0
00.0 00.0
10.0 <40.0

Hg ug/L
<.1 <.1 <.1 <.1 <.1
<.1 .1
<.1

Mo ug/L
00.0 OO.O 00.0 00.0 OO.O
<10.0 OO.O <10.0
50.0

Nd ug/L

<20.00 <20.CO

<90.00 <90.00

10 20 .0 50 .0
130 <6u.O 170 <6U.O

10 70 700
850 930

00.0 00.0
70.0
50.0 50.0

00.U <10.0 <10.0
<20.0 20.0

<6.00

<30.00 O8U.OO

60 130

<2U.O <130.0

160 1,600

20.0 140.0

6.0 <40.0

Ni ug/L
<55.00
<45.00 <45.00 <15.00 <90.00

Sample
UT23 UT29 UT30 UT31 UT32
UT35 UT34 UT35 UT36A UT36B
UT37
UT39 UTAO UT41
UT43 CD UTAA
WY 1 WY 2 WY 3
WY A WY 5 WY 6 WY 7 WY 8
WY 9 WY10A WY108

Table ^.--Analyses of water samples from 163 springs in the Western S t a t e s--con t i nued

Sc ug/L
~ ---
---

Se ug/L
<1 1
<1 <1
1
<1 1
<1 --

.Ag ug/L ~
~ <6.00

Sr ug/L
300.0 7700U0..O0 30U.O 11 /*O0O0U0.U0 30u.O
100.0 11 *000.0
300.0 2*500.0

W ug/L ----
--

V ug/L --
<35.0

Yb ug/L

Y ug/L --

2n ug/L
<5.0 <5.0
5.0 <5.0 10.0
<5.0 <5.0 <5.0 <10.0

Zr ug/L <30.00

~ <1 <1 <1

-- 100.0 3*000.0 5*000.0

--

--

<6.00

4*000.0

<6.00

4*000.0

--
<30.0 <30.0

<5.0 7.0
<5.0
<10.0 <10.0

<90.00 <90.00

<2.00 OO.OO

5*600.0 8*500.0

-- 20.0 <60.0

<10.0 <10.0

<30.00 <180.00

Table 2 footnotes:
l Pb done by SPEC. 2Rn from O'Connell and Kaufmann (1976). 3A1, Ba, Be, B, Li, Mo, Sr, and Zn done by ICP; Fe and Mn done by WC. 4Ra value is for total radium done by PLN. 5Ra value ts for toal radium done by PLN. Al and Fe done by WC; Pb, L1, and Zn done by SPEC. 6Pb, L1, and Zn done by SPEC. 7 L1 and Zn done by SPEC. 8Pb done by SPEC; Mn done by WC. F 1s field measurement. 10temp, pH, do, Eh, and Rn obtained on 79-07-09; He, As, Pb, Hg, and Se on 80-08-25. Al and Fe done by WC; L1 and Zn done by SPEC.
pH, do, Eh, and Rn obtained on 79-07-11.
CD
-J pH, Rn, As, Hg, and Se from Barrett and Pearl (1976). 13Rn, As, Ga, Ge, Hg, Se, V, and Zr from Barrett and Pearl (1976). l^All data except spc, Ra, and U from Mallory and Barnett (1973). ^As, Cd, Hg, Se, and Zn from Barrett and Pearl (1976). All other data except spc, Ra, and U from Mallory and
Barnett (1973). Pb and L1 done by SPEC. 16temp, pH, spc, Ra, U, Rn, and all major ions obtained on 77-06-20. 17temp, pH, spc, Ra and U obtained on 76-09-23; Eh, Rn, He, As, Pb, Hg, and Se obtained on 80-06-27; IDS, all
major Ions, and Ba obtained on 70-07-24. 18temp, pH, spc, Ra, U, and all major Ions obtained on 75-05-20; Rn on 77-06-21; Eh on 80-06-26. 19temp, pH, spc, Ra, U, and all major Ions obtained on 75-05-20; Eh, Rn, He, As, Pb, Hg, and Se on 80-06-26. 20Major Ions and trace elements except As, Pb, Hg, and Se from Mallory and Barnett (1973). 2 *A11 data except temp, pH, and spc from Barrett and Pearl (1976). 22As, Cd, Hg, and Se from Barrett and Pearl (1976). All other data except temp, pH, and spc from Mallory and
Barnett (1973) or V. Janzer (oral commun., 1976). 23A1 done by WC; Pb and Li done by SPEC. As, Cd, Hg, Se, and Zn from Barrett and Pearl (1976). A value of 520
ug/L Sn was determined for this sample, but a value of <13 ug/L Sn was reported by Barrett and Pearl (1976); therefore, no Sn values are shown.
24temp, pH, spc, Eh, Rn, He, As, Pb, Hg, and Se obtained on 80-06-25; all other data except Ra and U on 75-07-26.

Table 2 footnotes: continued
2 ^Rn, As, Cd, Hg, and Se from Barrett and Pearl (1976). All other data except temp and spc from Mallory and Barnett (1973) or V. Janzer (oral commun., 1976).
26A11 data from Mallory and Barnett (1973) or V. Janzer (oral conunuh., 1976). 27Ra and U from Scott and Voegel1 (1961). 28Major Ions from Young and MUchell (1973). 29Eh and Rn obtained on 80-08-26. 30Eh, Rn, He, As, Pb, Hg, and Se obtained on 80-08-26. Al and Fe done by WC; L1 and Zn done by SPEC. 31 temp, pH, spc, Eh, Ra, U, Rn, all major Ions, As, Hg, Pb, and Se obtained on 78-08-26; He on 80-08-21. Al and Fe done by WC; LI and Zn done by SPEC. QQ 32do, Eh, and Rn obtained on 79-07-07. 00 33do, Eh, and Rn obtained on 79-07-01. 34do, Eh, and Rn obtained on 79-06-30. 35pH, Ra, U, and Rn from O'Connell and Kaufmann (1976). 36Ra, U, and Rn from O'Connell and Kaufmann (1976). 37 pH and Rn from O'Connell and Kaufmann (1976). 38spc and Eh obtained on 80-08-27. 39 spc, Eh, He, As, Pb, Hg, and Se obtained on 80-08-27. Mn done by WC. 40spc, Eh, He, As, Pb, Hg, and Se obtained on 80-08-27. 41temp, pH, spc, do, Eh, Ra, U, Rn, He, all major Ions, As, Be, Pb, Hg, Se, and Zn obtained on 79-04-18. Al and Fe done by WC; L1 done by SPEC; Be and Zn done by ICP. 42pH, spc, do, Eh, Ra, U, Rn, He, all major Ions, As, Be, Pb, Hg, and Se obtained on 79-04-19. ^ 3do, Eh, Rn, and He obtained on 80-07-30. ^do, Eh, Rn, He, and trace elements obtained on 80-07-30. Fe and Mn as well as Al , Ba, Be, B, LI, Mo, Sr, and Zn done by ICP.

Table 3.--Summary of radioactive parameters
[The anomaly threshold was determined by adding two geometric deviations to the geometric mean and converting back to the antilog value. Arbitrary values for values shown as below detection were used to compute the mean for most parameters. No mean is shown for parameters having >50 percent of the values below detection; instead, the lowest value above detection is shown in parentheses, and only the number of samples above detection is shown]

Parameter

Minimum

Maximum

Geometric Number mean of samples

Anomaly threshold

Ra(pCi/L) Ra228(pCi/L) U(yg/L) Rn(pCi/L)
REF UEF Ra/spcU/spc-

<0.1 (2.4) <.01 <10
.0098 .00001 .026 .00004

300 33 120 110,000 n nnn
110,000 100 200 160

1.48
rdyoe 549
7?R
16.4 .062 .78 .14

163 8
1lo£oQ 9}6R
161 161 163 163

171
AQ 1
20,400 in nnn
21,700 78.3 27.6 36.6

89

Table 4.--Summary of nonradioactive parameters
[Arithmetic mean rather than geometric mean is shown for pH and Eh. Selected values for data below the detection limits were used to compute the mean for most parameters. No mean is shown for parameters having >50 percent of the values below detection; instead, the lowest value above the detection limit is shown in parentheses, and only the number of samples above the detection limit is shown. No values above the detection limit were reported for Sb, Bi, and La. Sn is discussed in table 2. Units of measurement are the same as those shown in table 2]

Parameter

Minimum

Maximum

Geometric mean

Number of samples

temp ---------pH spc IDS do
Eh SiO ? Ca-Mg
j
Na _- _ __-
£
HCOo+COo
so4
C1
v/ X
F

POA
ft 1 r\ JL /A»Co Ra

____

Be-- ---

rC*dA -------------Pr-------------Co

Cu Ga PP
F P ------- -
Ph___ __

6
7Q
83 83 <\.. 0\f5*j
-DCQo(U\
1.3
\. i
4, Q
5.9 .7 .1

94 9.5 52,000 35,000
UR
270 270 930 330 15,000
Q7H
4,330 2,800 26,000
17

<.01
S 1 f\ N x \J
<2.4
(.1) <5 (1)
/*2\
(.65) M /M
,|f n4 " 9^;
^* X \J
<}

4.9 .77
10,000 1,000 7,600
?fi
QQ nnnC-W
C- \J } W\/
1
6.9
40 14 15 47,000 230
90

28.8 7.4 1910 1250
9 9K
1 ft
34.1
C011. 9£
10.7 240
16 4
308 136
1 pQ JL £. k-»
.040 .052 42.2 6.1 60.4
OCQ
50.8 1.1

163
1I£DOQ
163 123 53
73 124 124 124 124
124 124 124 124 124
123 70 127 76 127
25 127
3
20
25 7 7 127 74

Table 4. Summary of nonradioactive parameters - continued

Parameter
Li ... ... Mn
Ha-- _ _ _ ----- _
Mn---- __ _ _ - _ WH _______ _ _ _ _
Ni Sc Se_ - __ ____
rAtyn ___________________________
Sr__ ______ _
V--_--_---_- _ -Yb Y Zn
7r_ _____

Minimum

Maximum

<10 <1 (-1) <4
(2,000)
(1)
(i)({ *+45}})
(.02) 2 (-
0
(\J51L^) (\C7.»^3\) (.02) ({ £?.?§)\ <N 5\J
(*\

14,000 1,800
qn
760 2 000
L. y \J\J\J
15JL *J
3C.0
5*J 1
oo r\f\(\
190 20
?4
20 700
57

Geometric mean

Number of samples

321JC. X
1Q 5
7.7
1030
5 4.

127 127
125JL £. %J 1
5 5 14 6 127
5 4 9 17 97 7

Table 5»~+te1rlx of correlation coefficients for all parameters

[Matrix Is based on all samples* Underline designates correlation significant at 95-percent level* Asterisk designates parameter not used in factor analysis. Numbers below diagonal are numbers of valid pairs of data for th* corresponding correlation coefficients above diagonal]

PH

Eh mv

temp log spc log

TOSs log * TDSR log* 00 log*

Ra log

Ra228log* U log

PH
Eh m v temp log spc 'log TOSs log * TOSR log * DO log * Ra log Ra228log * 0 log Rn log * He log * S102 log Ca log Mg log Na log K log HCOCOlog S04 log Cl log F log N03 log P04 log *
alk loy * hrd log * Al log As log * 8a log Be log » B log Cr log *
Co log * Cu log » Ga log * Ge log * Fe log Pb log *
Li log Mn log Hg log * Mo I og Ni log * Sc log * Se log * Ag log »
Sr log W log *
V log * Yb log * Y log » Zn log * Z r log *

0.7361 73
16U 160 123
45
52 160
8 160
96 35 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 130
123 70 116
123 127
76 127
25 127
fa 20 25
7 7 127 74 127 127
8 125
5 5 14 6 127
5 4
9 1 7.
97 7

0.0235 174.7237
73 73 72 19 44 73
6 73 73 35 72 72 72 72 72 72 72 72 73 72 21 68 72 73 65 73 16 73
2 6 7 3 1 73 65 73 73 8 73 3 1 14 0 73 3 0
4
5 61
5

0.0938 -0.3735
0.3156 163 123 45
53 163
8 163
96 35 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 130 123 70 1 16 123 127 76 127
25 127
8 20 25 7
7 127
74 127 127
8 125
5 5 14 6 127 5 4
9 17 97
7

-0.3936 -0.4757
0.1360 0.5652
123 45
53 163
8 163
96 35 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 130
123 70
116. 123 127
76 127
25 127
8 20 25
7 7 127 74 127 127
8 125
5 5 14 6 127 5 4 9 17
97 7

-0.3826 -0.4976
0.1696 Q .9907
0.5876 44 49 123
8 123
84 34 123 123 123
123 123 123 123 123 123 123 70 115 123 123
74 123
24 123
8 20 24
7 7 123 72 123 123
8 121
5 5 14 6 123 5 4
9 16 94
7

-0.4174 -0.3364
-0.2839
0.9848 0.9914 0.5144
15 45
1 45
22 13 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 . 44 43 37 44 45 17 45 16 45 7
20 21
6 7
45 19 45 45
3 45
5 4
0 6 45 5 3 9 17
15
6

-0.0684
0.5283 -0.6444 -0.4404 -0.5184 -0.4871
0.6744
53 1
53 44 ,25 49 49 49
49 49 49 49 49 50 49 15 49 49 50 38 50
6 50 3 11 9
3 2 50 38 50
50 6
50 0 2 8 2 50 3 2 5 9
39 1

-0.5061

-0.6340

-0.3558

-U.3826

0.2637

0.2759

0.6722

-0.5544

0.6577

-0.5141

0.5168 *** ********

-0.3365 ***

1 .0311

0.9293

8 0.4182

163 8

96 8

35 1

124 8

124 8

124 8

124 8

124 8

124 8

124 8

124 8

130 8

123 8

70 1

116 8

123 8

127 8

76 8

127 8

25 5

127 8

81

20 1

25 1

71

70

127 8

74 8

127 8

127 8

80

125 8

50

50

14 0

60

127 8

50

40

90
17 1

97 8

70

-0.2140 0.4840
-0.6094 0.0915 0.0851 0.3003 0.4650
-0.0365 0.1778 1.1325 96 35 124 124 124
124 1.24 124 124 124 130 123 70 116 123 127 76 127 25 127
8 20 25
7 7 127 74 127 127
8 125
5 5 14 6 127 5 4 9 17
97 7

THE DIAGONAL OF THE CORR MATRIX CONTAINS THE STD DEV OF THE VARIABLE FOR ONLY THE VALID PAIRS.

Table 5.--Matrix of cory»Utlon coefficients for all parameters--Continued

Kn log *

He log *

Si02 log

Ca log

Mg log

Na log

K log

HCOCOlog

S04 log

C I log

PH

0.0071

-0.0546

0.0380

-0.5807

-0.6319

-0.2510

-0.3806

-0.0970

-0.3120

-0.25U9

Eh mv

-0.2240

-0.2278

-0 .3007

0.0122

0.1175

-0.6045

-0.5459

-0.2975

-0.2518

-0.3820

t emp loy

0.2895

0.3675

0.5512

-0.1157

-0.3626

0.2486

0.2958

0.0534

0.3281

0.0211

spc log

0.1619

0.4302

-0.1028

0.7118

0.5844

0.9181

0.8858

0.3985

0.6170

0.9317

TOSs loy *

0.2171

0.3985

-0.0336

0,6877

0.5484

0.9274

O.b917

0.3705

0.6477

0.9143

TDSR loy *

-0.2206

0.4144

-0.2661

0.71b4

0.7214

0.9501

0.8871

0.2885

0.5849

0.9284

DO log *

-0.1681

-0.4316

-0.4529

-0.0534

0.0446

-0.5708

-0.6424

-0.2363

-0.4438

-0.3047

Ra log

0.4072

0.3114

-0.01 52

0.6101

0.5317

0.5900

0.7079

0.4390

0.3903

0.5399

Ra228log *

0.6430 *

-0.0340

0.0684

0.0658

-0.6042

-0.4330

-0.0592

-0.4532

-0.7383

U log

-0.0684

-0.3460

-0.3732

0.34o9

0.5149

0.0053

-0.0109

0.0400

-0.0222

0.2128

Rn loy *

0.7654

-0.0171

0.2147

-0.00o4

-0.1521

0.2721

0.2257

-0.0303

U.0985

0.1305

He log *

35

0.1130

-0.0185

0.6101

0.2254

0.3280

0.4146

-0.2201

0.2464

0.3648

Si 02 loy

85

34

0.3693

-0.3225

-0.3656

0.0442

0.1041

-0.0402

0.0955

-0.1727

Ca log

85

34

124

0.6897

0.8705

0.4506

0.5711

0.2397

0.4864

0.6226

My 1 og

85

34 1 24

124

1 .0357

p. 3325

0.497$

0 . 3509

0.2748

0.5322

Na log

85

34

1 24

124

124

0.8047

0.8689

,0.3828

0.5777

0.9051

K loy

35

34

124

124

124

124

0.7038

0.4163

0.5619

0.8015

HCOCOloy

85

34 1 24

124

124 1 24

124

0.5069

0.1176

0.3534

S04 loy

85

34

124

124

124 124

124

124

0.5997

0.5009

VO

Cl loy F loy

85 34 1 24 124 124 124 124 124 124 1.0596 89 35 124 1^4 124 124 124 124 124 124

NO 3 log

84

34

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

P04 log »

31

14

70

70

70

70

70

70

70

70

a I k log *

81

30

1 16

11-6

116

1 16

116

116

116

116

hrd log »

84

34

1 23

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

A I loy

86

35

124

124

124

1 24

124

124

124

124

As log *

74

34

75

75

75

75

75

75

75

75

da log

86 35 124 124 124 124 1 24 124 124 124

Be loy *

20

9 25 ^5 25 25 25 25 25 25

B log

86 35 1 24 124 124 1 24 124 124 124 124

Cr log * 3 2 8 8 8 b 8 8 8 8

Co log * 6 3 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20

Cu loy »

13

4 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25

Ga loy * 4 1 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7

Ge log * 1 0 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7

Fe log

86

35

124

124

124

124

124

124

124

124

Pb log » 70 34 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 73

L i log

86

35 124

124

124

1 24

124

124

124

124

Mn I oy

86

35

124

124

124

124

124

124

124

124

Hg log * b 6 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8

Mo 1 og

85 35 122 122 122 122 122 122 122 122

Ni log *

4

3

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

Sc log * 2 0 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

Se log *

14

7 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14

Ag log * 0 0 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

Sr log

86 35 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 124

W loy * 3 0 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

V log * 0 0 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Yb log *

4

39

99

99

9

99

Y log * 6 3 17 17 17 17 17 17 17 17

Zn log *

73

29

94T -^

94

94

94

94

94

94

94

Zr log \* 6 4

ml u,

^

7

7

7

7

7

7

THE 6IA60NAL OF THE CORR MATRIX CONTAINS THE STD DEV OF THE VARIABLE FOR ONLY THE VALID PAIRS

T«bl« 3» Hrlrlx of correlation coefficients for all p«rM»t«r« Continued

plH,
E r( mv t >)np loy Sfic Log Tl)Ss loy * Tt)SR Log *
D() log *
R<) Log R »228loy *
U Log Rri Log *
H(i Log *
S 102 loy
c,» Log
M<) log
N« 1 Loy K Log H< CCOloy S( 4 Log
C Log F Log Nl 3 Log PC 4 Log *
a k log * hr d log *
A Leg A; Log * B, i Log B< loy *
B Log Crf log *
CCi log * Ct Log * Gi loy * G< log *
F< log PI log *
L log
Ml log H. log * M< log N log *
S log *
s< log *
Afi log * Sr log U log *
V log * Yfc log * Y log *
Zr log * Zr log «

F Log
0.1305 -0.5771
0.7092 0.1803 0.2279 -0.2767 -0.5282 0.2549 -0.2054 -0.5241 0.3389 0.1333 0.5177 -0.2449 -0.4275 0.4039 0.3217 0.2009 0.3690 0.1360 0.6066
123 70
116 123 125.
76 125
25 125
8 20 25
7 7 125 74 125 125 8 123 5 5 14 6 125 5 4 9 17 95 7

N03 loy

P04 Log *

0.0334
-0.5440 -0.1311 -0.1563 -0.0034
0.4488
-0.3420 0.4787
-0.1567 -0.1439 -0.2583 -0.0022
0.1789 -0.1922 -0.2144 -0.2369 -0.3687 -0.0048 -0.5825
0.9470 70
115 123 123
74 123
24 123
8 20 24
7 7 123 72 123 123 8 121 5 5 14 6 123 5 4 9 16 94 7

0.0424 -0.4062
0.2338 0.2378 0.2520 0.0177 0.0531 0.1880 ***********
-0.0967 -0.1265
0.4263 0.1300 0.1876 0.0875 0.1761 0.2738 0.0000 0.179.4 0.1584 0.1030 -0.1218 0.7669
62 70 70 21 70 16 70
8 20 24
7 7 70 19 70 70 3 68 5 5 0 6 70 5 4 9 16 41 7

alk log*
-0.0237 -0.3155
0.1407 0.3753 0.3433 0.2220 -0.2537 0.4032 -0.0598 -0.0733 -0.0713 -0.1606 -0.0513 0.2305 0.3067 0.3616 0.3903 0.9960 0.1256 0.3294 0.2135 -0.2604 0.0788 0.4fa6?
115 116
71 116
20 116
8 20 24
7 7 1 16 67 116 116 8 114 2 5 14 3 116 5 4 9 17 93 4

hrd log *
-O f 6128 0.0222
-0.1934 0.7082 0.6814 p. 7516
-0.0321 0.6047 0.0642 0.4153
-0.0290 0.5135
-0.3357 0.9881 0.9226 0.4428 0.5671 0.2742 0.4450 0.6285
-0.2943 0.0526 0.1575 0.2382 0.7282 123 74 123 24 123 8 20 24 7 7 123 72 123 123 d 121 5 5 14 6 123 5 4 9 16 94 7

AL log
-0.3809 0.0017
-0.2657 0.3693 0.3483 0.4401 0.3299 0.1033
-0.5615 0.3245 0.0404 0.2728
-0.1875 0.3715 0.41 71
0.2625 -0.1129
0.1952 0.3378 -0.2757 0.2787 0.2183 -0.1676 0.3974 0.6427
76 127
25 127
8 20 25
7 7 127 74 1 27 127 8 125 5 5 14 6 127 5 4 9 17 97 7

As Log*
-0.1317 -0.4712
0.4835 0.3983 0.4051 0.3692 -0.5933 0.5194 0.5529 -0.1686 0.2479 0.2099 0.3896 0.0912 0.0261 0.4798 0.5473 0.3095 0.4804 0.2386 0.4884 -0.4111 0.1725 0.2758 0.0720 -0.0526 0.9015
76 18 76
3 3 9 2 0 76 71 76 76 8 74 4 1 14 1 76 0 0 3 4 69 5

Ba loy
-0.3755 -0.1828
0.0255 0.4265 0.3858 0.3333 -0.1528 0.5881 0.0560 0.0371 0.0974 0.1707 -0.1566 0.5134 0.5110 p. 3205 0.3987 0.3506 -O.J932 0.3656 -0.0320 -0.0030 O.U370 0.3652 0.5220 0.0663 0.0399 0.6793
25 127
8 20 25
7 7 127 74 127 127 8 125 5 5 14 6 127 5 4 9 17
97 7

THE DIAGONAL OF THE CORK MATRIX CONTAINS THE STD DEV OF THE VARIABLE FOR ONLY THE VALID PAIRS.

Be log *
-0.4316 0.2942
-0.2507
0.5264 0.6408 0.8984 0.3088 0.7017 0.6437 -0.3250 -0.2123 -U.0574 0.3519 0.5543 0.4574 0.4762 0.1214 0.2244 0.4525 -0.2105 0.3444 0.1222 -0.0948 U.454Q 0.3269 -0.0133 0.0824 0.5673
25 4 6 5 1 4
25 18 25 25
2 25
4 1 1 1 25 1 0 3 5 13 5

B log
-0.1787 -0.5461
0.3373 0.7599 0.7518 0.6867 -0.4786 0.5538 -0.5610 -0.0612 0.1437 0.1896 0.1356 0.3304
0.8095 0.7438 0.4662 0.5616 0.7207 0.515? -0.2644 0.3474 0.4422 D.32A2 0.0774 0.5944 0.2851 0.3678 0.8237
8 20 25
7 7 127 74 127 127 8 125 5 5 14 6 127 5 4 9 17
97 7

Table 5. -Matrix of correlation coefficients for all parameters Continued

pri
Eh mv t e trp loy spc log TDSs log * TDSR loy * DO loy* Ra log Ra228loy* U log Rn loy* He leg*
Si02 loy Ca log Mg Ioy Na loy K log HCOCOlocj S04 log C I loy F loy N03 log P04 log* a I k log* hro loy* A I loy As log * Bd loy Be loy * B log Cr log * Co log * Cu log *
Ga log *
Fe log Pb log * L i log Mn loy Hy log * Mo I og Ni log * Sc log * Se log * Ay log * Sr loy W log * V log * Yb log * Y loy * Zn log * Zr Ipg *

Cr log *
-0. 5143 1.00GU
-U.3157 0.7479 0.7675 U.9U8 .U.9718 0.0682
U.2912 -u.9957 -0.9996
U.1666 U.582U 0.4080 0.6161 0.7572 -0.5851 0.8077 0.6465 -0-.3510
0.6089 0.6964 -0.5872 0.5721 0.5536 -C.4260 U.1399 0.9009 0.7976 C.6435
6 6 2 2 b 4 fa 8 0 8 1 1 0 0 8 1 U 2 6 4 2

Co log »
-0.3375 -0.30o8
0.0236 0.9622 0.9493 0.9647 0.0435 G.4812
0.0931 -0.5890 -0.8335
0.1097 0.61 58 0.5817 0.8373 0.8386 0.51 14 0.7087 0.8391 0.3062 0.0802 0.3105 0.4989 0.611 5 -0.2165 0.9969 Lt.4810 0.7014 0.8873 0.9519 0.3840
14 5 7
20 4
20 20
0 20
0 3 U 2 20 3 3 7 14 2 2

Cu log *

Ga loy *

Ge log *

-0.5179 -0.0414 -0.4439
0.8698 0.8933 0.8634 0.1758 Q.4051

0.49V6 0.8804 0.3063 -0.10u5 0.131 1 0.13^5 -0.1751 -0.8a91

*

0.0957
0.6004 0.5109 0.6146 0.6272 1 .0000 -0.0740

0.4375 -U.4289
0.3882
-0.2397 0 .6699 0.6492
0.7915 0.7587 -0.0577
U.7025 0.7536 -0.2635 0.2901 0.365,1 -0.1612 0.6916 0.4959
o.sroo
U.2714 U.7763 U.7480 0.9334 0.9419
0 1 QrQ
6 3 25 7 25 25
0 24
1 3 0 2 25 2 2
6 11 10
4

* *

-0.4379 -0.6506 *

0.6547 -0.8652 -0.5V82
0.5645 0.2920 0.1770 -0.0453 0.4603 0.8U23 -0.2223 0.1721 0.2087 -0.8576 0.8249 -1 .0000 -0.731 5

*

-0.0257 -1 .0000 -0. 1685 -0.0557
G.3444 3 7 1 7 7
0 6 0 2
0 0 7 3 1
2 3 2 1

-0.4168
0.6549 -0.1465
0.2163 0.5426 0.6368 0.2229 0.7120 0.6490 0.1999 0.3622 0.9430 0.2928 -U.1244 0.5474
-0.2555 -0.5875
0.5377 -1 .0000
0.6583 J.7068 0.4104 0.1943
7 0 7 7 0 7 0 3 0 0 7 2 1 2 5 0 2

Fe log

Pb loy *

-0.5106 -0.2850
0.1454 0.5503 0.5661 0.4657 -0.4085 0.5462 0.1950 0.0470

0.3799 0.0614 0.4644 0.3923 0.4464 0.5653 0.1456 0.5219 0.3752 U.1 971 -0.2472 0.1884 0.0764 0.4632

0.3700 U.1147 0.5106 0.3931 0.3494
0.3000 0.6623 -0.0650 0.6450 0.8330
74 127 1 27
8 1 25
5 5 14 6 127 5 4 9 17 97 7

* *

-0.1129 -0.2510
0.3572 0.0525 0.1089 0.0203 0.1462 0.1 513 -0.8876 -U.2619 U.2947 -0.0595 0.3323 -0.0980 -0.2148 0.1420 U.2142 -0.1066 0.1649 -0.0782 g i 3Q75 -0.2135 0.5019 -0.1108 -0.1296 0.01 32 0.2840 0.1644 -0.1875 0.1 525 0.8480 0.6992
O c UQQ
0.1 331 0.7968
74 74
8 74
3 0 14 3 74 0 0 4 5 64 4

Li loy
-0.2201 -0.5903
0.4858 0.7616 0.7707 0.6275 -0.0045 0.6229 -0.0919 -0.1556 0.2563 0.3151 0. 2244 0.3406 0 . 1 880 0.8299 0.8086 0.4510 0 . 5707 O.o765 0.6225 -0.3932 0.3735 0.4223 0.3203 0.0526 0.6488
0.2742 O.o711 0.2669
0.67U4 0.3947 0.6433 0.4849 0.2470 0.9259
127 8
125 5 5
14 6
127 5 4 9
17 97
7

THE DIAGONAL OF THE CORR MATRIX CONTAINS THE STD DEV OF THE VARIABLE FOR ONLY THE VALID PAIRS.

Mn log

Hg log *

-0.4444 -0.4358
0.3224 u.6050 0.6034 0.3542 -0.5268 0.5485 -0.6267 -U.2003
U U cV o
0.3700 0.0434 0.5286 0.3454
0.5496 0.5678 0.2440 0.5427 0.4565 0.3386 -0.3862 0. 2544 0.3284 0.4819 0.1 578 U.4029 0.4209 -0.0830 0.5409 U.5734 0.4829 0.5656 -0.3013 -U.4560 0.5510 0.2053 0.6004 0.9780
8 125
5 5 14 6 127 5 4 9 17 97 7

-0.0901 0.3914
-0.4090 0.2440 0.1877 0.0019 0.3892 0.1476
0.5265 0.6021 U.2854 -0.3504 0.2601 0.1346 0.1460 0.0594 -0.0964 -0.0717 0.2368 -0.2388 0.5960 -0.2334 -O.U32 0.2248 O.b259 -0.5936 -0.0468 1 .OLOO 0.0138
********!***
0.5628 0.1958 -0.0460 0.2778 0.8109
8 0 0 .2 0 8 0 0 1 0 8 0

Table 5.--Matrix of correlation coefficients for all parameters Continued

h o Log

Ni Log*

Sc log *

Se log * Ag log *

Sr Log

W log*

V log * Yfc log * . Y log *

pH

0.1816

-0.5797

-0.9667

-0.3279

-0.7823

-0.4905

-0.401 5

-0.0751

-0.3479

-0.4588

Eh mv

0.7723

0.0214

-0.2877

-0.4165

-0.2066

0.3652

t emp log

0.3398

0.2753

-0.2169

-0.0923

-0.0949

0.1289

-0.2666

0.2132

0.2917

-0.2777

spc log

0.3283

-0.8177

0.9727

0.44B3

0.8887

0.8459

0.7163

0.6897

0.9802

0.9279

TDSs loy *

0.3401

-0.8207

0.9878

0.4846

0.8178

0.8352

0.61 12

0.6421

0.9786

0.9337

TDSR Log *

C.1069

-0.8205

0.9958 ***********

0.7998

0.7991

0.6025

0.9987

0.9797

0.9355

DO Loy *

-b.3057

1 .0000

-0.0719

-1 .0000

-0.2379

0.9570

-1 .0000

-0.8351

-0.0573

Ra Log

0.2522

0.1895

0.7669

0.1103

&i§297

0.7285

0.8177

0.9412

U.8239

0.3862

Ra22&loy * -0.4593

-0.1427

U log

-C.0847

0.4394

0.7807

0.3869

-0.2910

0.1718

-0.1 587

-0.2682

-0.1 594

0.3137

R rv log *

0.3530

-0.4563

-1 .0000

-0.07o6

0.2590

0.5940

0.0110

-0.9757

He Log *

C.4788

0.6883

-0.3850

0.4218

0.7870

0.0179

Si02 log

0.1125

0.9179

-0.3786

O.U820

-0.6843

-0.1 550

-0.1482

-0.2688

-U.0125

-0.1968

Ca Log

L.1 520

-0.7742

0.8762

0.4619

0.7394

0.8411

0.4621

0.6445

0.8539

0.6095

Mg Log

-0.0804

-U.3978

0.8918

0.2721

0.8120

0.6676

0.5190

0.6668

0.6906

0.5981

Na Log

0.3304

-0.81 26

0.9531

0.2939

0.8565

0.7135

0.6773

0.1985

0.9623

0.7992

K Loy

0.2921

-0.5505

0.8333

0.2928

0.8118

0.7383

0.1707

0.6327

0.8490

0.6272

HCOCOlog

-C.0190

-0.2727

0.5105

-0.1969

0.7547

0.3448

-0.0073

0.6220

0.0030

-0.0881

S04 log

0.2946

-0.4258

0.8391

0.6224

0.6706

0.6382

0.2446

0.9041

0.8400

0.8237

vo CL Log
F Log

0.2624 0.2773

-U.801 5 0.5509

0.8666 -0.6984

U . ioV4 -0.1536

0.8792 0.1867

0.7440 0.1346

0.6055 0.6577

0.4737 0.3933

0.9166 0.1488

0.7381 0.0852

N03 log

-0.1711

0.5921

0.3343

0.3576

-0.5895

-0.2057

-0.1 289

-0.7981

-0.4127

0.1249

0.4303

0.5137

-0.7409

.-0.9204

0.1271

0.2372

-C.0664

0.3410

0.3355

alk log *

C.0035

-1 .0000

0.4707

-0.2491

0.9744

0.3271

-0.1024

0.5158

0.0093

-0.0811

hra Log #

0.1 050

-0.7272

0.8720

0.4128

0.7681

0.8206

0.4649

0.6333

0.8346

0.5695

Al log

0.0976

0.3527

-0.36.94

0.2452

0.2157

0.3058

-0.2386

-0.3313

-0.0387

0.5761

As Log *

0.4083

-0.2400

-0.2419

J7O 1

0.0594

0.0421

da L og

0.0438

0.2820

0.4911

-0.0572

0.8232

0.5356

0.3644

0.8U04

0.7430

0.3029

Be Log *

-0.0356

0.2723

0.3966

-0.9397

0.9572

B Log

0.2994

0.2207

0.5082

0.4351

0.7586

0.5782

0.6798

0.3995

0.7974

0.7742

C r Log *

0.1 874

0.6746

1 .0000

0.9486

Co log *

0.1543

0.9998

1 .0000

0.8217

0.7929

0.9941

0.9415

0.9651

Cu log *

0.1239

l") Q Q ? L

1 .0000

0.6923

1.0000

1 .0000

0.8767

0.9512

Ga Log *

-0.4378

1.0000

-0.6720

-0.661 5

1 .0000

0.2293

-0.491 1

0.5872

-0.1473

-1.0000

1 .0000

0.8463

Fe Log

0.2325

0.4845

0.9822

0.4697

0.4898

0.5263

0.2109

0.6439

0.3637

0.5685

Pb log #

0.3244

0.9384

0.2539

0.2840

0.1532

-0.7219

0.4988

Li log

0.3144

0.3920

0.9164

-0.2175

0.6548

0.6170

0.7197

0.5091

0.8420

0.6675

Mn log

0.1528

-0.0709

0.6555

0.3958

0.7864

0.6085

0.5925

0.8731

0.7598

0.7297

Hg log *

0.1226 *********** ***********

1 .0000

0.1792

Mo Log

0.8175

0.5367

0.1143

0.5121

-0.4563

0.3245

-0.1171

0.5501

0.2326

0.0324

5 0.4469

-0.9432

Sc log * 5 0 0.3280

0.8916

1 .0000

0.9964

Se Log *

14

0

0 0.2439

0.5031

Ag log * 6 1 0 0 0.6618 0.8421

1.0000 *

Sr log

125

5

5 14

6

0.7816

0.4850

0.8881

0.8709

0.7652

W log *

501

00

5 0.2088

-0 . 2488

V log # 4 0 0 0 2 4 1 0.3852 *

1 .0000

Yb log * 9 1 2 0 1 9 1 1 0.6112 0.8o78

Y log *

17

1

3

0

1 17

32

7 0.4935

Zn Log *

95

2

1 , 14

97 0 1 2 3

Z r log *

732

007

001

2

THE DIAGONAL OF THfc CORR MATRIX CONTAINS THE STD DEV OF THE VARIABLE FOR ONLY THE VALID PAIRS.

Table 5. Matrix of correlation coefficient! for all parameters

Zn 1 oy *

Zr log *

PH

-C.38A6

-0.0505

Eh mv

0.0030

-0.0901

t eirp loy

0.0380

-0.0590

spc log

U.A627

0.4576

TO Ss Loy *

O.A777

0.5308

TOSR loy *

G.2938

0.5809

-0.23AO

Ra Ioy Ra226loy *

0.4203

0.5300

0.6816 ***********

U loy

U.0829

0.2943

Rn loy *

0.1633

0.4027

He log *

0.3707

-0.4844

Si 02 loy

-0.1032

-0.3680

Ca log

0.4264

0.3153

Mg log

0.3492

0.37e>5

N a log

1.3713

C.4678

K log

0.3855

0.5527

HCOCOlOy

-U.1528

0.2181

S04 loy

U.3322

0.2739

Cl log

0.321 5

0.3b70

F log

0.0242

-0.2035

1 N03 log POA loy * a 1 k log * hrd loy *

-0.1675 C.4883
-0.1491 C.4186

Al log

0.2769

0.4356 -0.2248
0.2123 0.4077 -0.0025

As log *

U.1303

0.8702

Qa I oq

0.2584

0.2780

Be log *

0.4471

0.5733

B loy

b.2243

0.6313

C r log *

U.8480

1 .0000

Co log *

1.0000

1.0000

Cu log *

0.7460

0.51 59

Ga log *

-1.0000

Ge log *

-1 .0000

F e log

0.5278

0.2924

Pb log *

0.0799

0.3605

Li log

U.3695

0.6081

Mn log

0.4779

0.1308

Hg log *

G.1873

M.o log

0.3662

0.4587

Ni log * Sc log * Se log *

1.0000

0.0042

*********

1.0000

0.1652 ***********

Ag log *

S r log

0.4243

0.3524

W log *

V log *

Yb log *

-1.0000

Y loy * Zn log *

0.9692 0.6759

-1.0000 -1.0000

Zr log *

2 0.3550

THE DIAGONAL OF THE CORR MATRIX CONTAINS THE STD D.EV OF THE "VARIABLE FOR ONLY THE VALID PAIRS

Eh temp log ftp c l og Ra log
U log Si02 log Ca log Mg log
Na log K log HCOCOlog S04 log Cl log F Jog N03 log vO A1 log 00 Ba log B log
F« log Li log
Mn log Mo log Sr log

Table 6. designates correlation significant at 99-percent level]
tMetrlx Is based on 71 selected samples* Underline

1.0000 0.(<729 ( . 0 91 0 -Q.4036 -n.5454
-0.2963 -o.l156 -0.6559 -Q.7251 -Q.2575 -0.4183 -0.5660 -0.2135
-0.3063 n.1064
0.0444 -Q.3600 -".4415
-0.1299
-0.4551
-0.2778 -0.3561
0.1975 -Q.5734

Eh wv

temp log »pc log

-Q.4764 -0.3540
0.0048 0.1101 -0.6072
-Q.55-31 -r.5293
-0.2745" -0.3796 -0.5738
-0.0184
-0.1821 -0.5452 -0.3609*
-Q.S900 -0.4646 -0.2956 -0.2823

1.0000 0.20^7 0.3141 -0.6497 Q.4Q19 -0.0942 -0.3847 0.3370 0.32QS -D.086f 0.4916 0.0417 0.7215 -0.6101
-0.0102 0.3994 0.2109 0.499V
0.5734 0.2259

0.2037 1 .0000 0.6675 0.0341 0.0776 0.6497 0.493? 0.9221 0.8760 0.563d
0-9328 0.37 1 2 -0.201 1 0.3476_ 0.3915. 0.777a 0.6Sa4 0.0329 0.5908 0.326ft 0.8361

-0.5454 -0.3540
0.31^1 0.6675 I. 0000 -0.0079 0.1902
0.471 1 0.590U 0.7053 0.4926 0.3604 0.5161
-013420" 0.0761 0.5607 0.5064 0.6399 0.6177 0.4653 0.2431 7173

-0.6497
0.0341 -0.0079
1.0000 -0.2856
0.3305 0.5142 -0.1091 -0.0720 0.2291 -0.0981 0.1705 -0.5078 0.4536 0.33*?. -0.0374 -0.1686 -0.0512 -0.1935 -0.3120 -0.4284
0.0834

-0.1156 -0.30P7
0.4Pl 0.077h 0.1902 -0.2856 1.0090 -0.1777 -0.2402 0.2336 0.2643 0.1106 0.17BO -0.0341 0.4812 -0.3413 -0.2035 0.0065 0.2645 0.1154 0.320H
0.2062
0.0479

-0.6559
0.0048
-0.0942
0.6497
0.5368 0.3305 -0.1777 1.0000 0.8476 0.36Q1 0.4761 0.3193 0.3H17 0.6009 -0.1715 0.0603 0.5264 0.47R7 0.2264 0.4635 0.3062 0.471U
0.0079 0.7809

-0.7251 0.1101
-0.3847
Q.4S32 0.4711 0.5142 -0.2402 0.8476 1.0000 0.2249 0.4010, 0.5123 0.0931 o.a7PQ -0.4268
Q.28B6 0.5100 0.5167 0.1063 0.3615 0.1315 0.2727 -0.3130 0.5500

0.9221 0.5900 -0.1091 0.2338 0.3691 0.2249 1.0000 0.8770 0.5209 0.6459 0.8760 0.5811 -0.3237 0.2139 0.2403 0.6374 0.6043
Q.38B7 0.7306

TakU 6.

--Cwitlmwd

Al 1 og
»a 1 oo
e 1 oa
F« 1 oa Li 1 oa Mr» 1 oo MO 1 otj
Sr oa

23"3
0.7147 O.fe613 0 . 84 ? 6 0.5592 0.29"7

0 . 064i 0.0931
O.SftPb Q.38M
-C . 1742 0.42?;*

-0.4656 0.1151
-0.1601 0.6296 0.4507 0.6904 0.5251

0.3660 0 . 31 6 & 0-7121 . 0.5292 Q.7140
0.7568

0.2B01 1 .0000 -0.6646 -0.3162 -0.0398
0.6480 0.2754 0.6887 0.41*0

O.Z580 0.0845 0.4656 0.0636 0.6646 1.0000 0.3640 0.0169
-0.2773 -0.5132 -0.4719 -0.4417.

0.2139
0.2346 0.0931 0.1151 0.3860 -0.3162 0.3640
1 .0000 0.1273 -0.0324 0.2253 0.0094
0.0682 -0.0119
0.399B

0.5607
o.037a
n.0065 0.4787
0.5167 0.2403 0.3838 0.4447 -0. 1601 0.3186 -0.0398 0.0169
0.1273 1.0000 0.?246 0.1972 0.2248
0.4263 -0.0486
0-46?!

0.2264 0.1063 0.8374, 0.7147 0.5885 0.6298 0.7121 0.6480 -0.4122 -0.0324 0.2246
1.0000 0.4301 0.6715 0.5705 0.3332

0.6399 0.0512 0.1154
0.4635 0.36IS 0.6043 0.6613 0.3861 0.4507 0.5292 0.2754 -0.2773 0.2253 0.1972 0.4301 1.0000 0.6142 0 T 4889 0.3511 0-6439

0000* 1
SE/S'O L S97"0 66lC*u
OOSS^ 608//G EAU'O

OOOOM

OOOOM

M I0 u-
I I Id* U ZrfQf

Toz.iyo
TS?S'Q
ibec'o
gbSS'u 9 t?9S ' 0 LIL2' u
f! <f ' 0 -

BO I O||

.I9SC*0-. no t Ui

f itt'Q 0000*I ? 17 T 9 ' 0' c-l£9'0
f. 17 ? c? * U t; tj'; U " 0
0 r/ T ^ ' 0 r? 0 6 9 " 0
h I * 0-
bofefr* u 006S"o-

n

601 Ow
ooi UH tioi n

oo [ 9j

ooi 9 oo | *9

ooi IV oo t £Q*

00 [

^

f>o| 10

J° L bOt

M

X

00 | »0
b oi oo20L »Sn
00 [ tg
U0[ 3d«
bo t dui») *u, M3

'9 »IW.

Oo

Table 7.--Reordered varimax factor matrix for 24 parameters
[Numbers are factor loadings. Communality is percentage of total variance accounted for by these three factors. A data matrix of 71 samples and 24 variables was used]

Parameter

Factor 1 Duration of circulation

Factor 2 Depth of
circulation

Ma
ri ___
S04 Li $r
oj *

--

Fe Mn Mo

0.89364
QQOni
.86215 .80901 .80374
7QQQO
7/ 7/ 2c.9y8\j 7/ 4""4U0w0 62903\J L~ 3\J*J
.51857
.DcnUooooil

-0.00847
onQQQ
- .16908
1 QQ9Q
. 4*r<0J7/ 5v»2t. . 0W4^t9J9J1J.
.17765 .36603
no/ion
O34" 9J4^2t-
.42424

temp -FSi02 Eh---
Al --_-___
N03N0 9 U -£
Do-a, ------Mg HC0 3+C0 3 -
Da
Ca
nH _-

0.30350
49020 05579. U v» v» / J - 42700
" u. / \J\J
OQOQ7
-.27572 .00171
0.03816
. O£CDOo1 l7/
.31167
AQOOO
5wU07/ 4iO8
_ IQQfiR

0 77935 .76621 .60972
-. CDO£^O.OQOC /Toe'3 "3
-.DilOOO
-.71708 -.76168
0.04661
-. DC Qo1 l7/ oO
.02133
91 AQI
-.43303
lAQfifi

Factor 3 Partial pressure of
carbon dioxide
0 .o0oQliUr\oc
. 2u. 2£. 3O1X7/ .doOcbcooUn - .UnooynUnoo .cOoCQo1l/7
4" 5*J4t 0w7/ . 4^ 3*j1±9j\6j .^r)Uf\CobCo*3 .oocD7/0o1l
42t-7/ 1i 4» . ?£. 9jj9\6J9j
-0.08892
1 0539
1 9Q1 Q
- .17917
1 f)Q°7
- .03972
1 dAQ5
0\J . 8O<0J 9j^4r9j 71439. / J. *T «J J
.68051
.DCDC.oQOC~/t
. 5v>5v>6U9.76U - 7A^17

Communal ity
94 89
oQ4/l 70 oQQo 07 oQ^o 7/ 3*J 5-3
vJO
5+J 71 5-3
V»J
71 84
3«JQ;7
49
5«->53
59 60
66 91 56 71 76
£Q

101

Table 8.--Factor score matrix for 24 parameters and 71 samples

Sample

Older, deeper water: CA 1 CA 4 CA 5 CA 10 CO 11
CO 22
MT 2 MT 4
MT 6
MT 11 UT 9A UT 10UT 18 UT 23
UT 36A

-

CA 9 MT 1
MT 7 NV 24 NV 25B NV 29 NV 30 NV 32

-

--

Younger, shallower water:

CA 2-

CA 3

CA 6

CA 7

NV 21

NV 27

NV 28

UT 16--

- --

UT 17

UT 21

UT 26

-

UT 28

UT 30

Factor 1 Duration of
circulation

Factor 2 Depth of
circulation

Factor 3 Partial pressure of
carbon dioxide

0.320 .489 .977 .358 .584 .634 .425 .109 .261 .780 1.748 2.390 1.940 1.247 .352
.069 .829 .051 .145 .227 .763 .704 .538

1.270 1.338
.950 .003 .281 .682 1.063 1.180 .958 .383 .241 .121 .201 .324 .265
.983 .760 1.711 1.494 .514 .683 .751 .679

0.410 1.001
.637 1.063 1.008
.348 .832 .909 .514 .243 1.791 .557 .549 .181 1.046
- .436 -2.539 -1.742 - .562 -2.503 -1.629 - .725 -1.609

-1.470 -1.991 -1.152 -1.443 - .430 - .222 - .274 - .185 - .879 - .714 -1.490 - .490 - .326
102

- .676 - .686 - .609 - .608 - .694
-1.143 -1.165 -1.318 -1.045 - .663 - .248 -1.256 -1.408

- .374 - .171 - .483 -1.182 - .390
- .419 - .050 - .139 - .051 - .124 - .416
- .281 - .521

Table 8.--Factor score matrix for 24 parameters and 71 samples--continued

Sample

Younger, shallower water--cont. NV 16

NV 17

NV 20

NV 23

NV 31

UT 25

UT 29

-

UT 32

UT 33

UT 34

UT 35 -

UT 39-

--

Older, shallower water .
CO 14 CO 15 UT 19
UT 22

CO 10 MT 14
UT 6
UT 20 UT 24
UT 27 UT 31
UT 40

-

-

o
Younger, deeper water .

CO 12A

MT 13

-

NV 5

NV 6A

-

NV 18

CA 8
CO 17
MT 5
MT 8
MT 9 MT 12

-

Factor 1 Duration of circulation
-1.291 1.542 1.340 1.016
.585 .688 .366 .804 1.352 .304 .698 1.361
0.714 1.082 1.390
.093
2.425 1.014
.059 .718 .563 .691 .476 .435
.068 . .905
.723 .735 1.790
.425 .180 .162 .159 .117 .927

Factor 2 Depth of circulation

Factor 3
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide

.318 .580 .347 .059 .218 .597 .730 1.090 .817 .439 .955 .633
0.587 .554
2.018 .978
1.170 .177
1.028 1.001 1.928
.770 .800 1.655
.379 1.379 1.653 1.089 1.646
.524 1.205 1.915 1.526 1.594 1.223

.038 .363 .537 .445 .141 .063 .282 .672 .484 .350 .174 .473
1.211 1.476
.055 .001
.122 . .070
.347 . .149
.727 .306 .314 .706
2.323 1.124 2.097 1.293 2.040
-1 463 .233
1.505 2.009
.727 1.710

103

Table 8 footnotes: *May be older, deeper water having abnormally low temperature or younger, shallower water having abnormally high salinity. 2May be older, deeper water having abnormally low salinity or younger, shallower water having abnormally high temperature.
104

