United States Department of the Interior / -; Geological Survey
GEOLOGY A3D GROUND-WATER RESOUBCES OP THE NORTHERN PART OS1 THE RANfiGRAS PLAIN AREA, YUNA COUNTY, ARIZONA D. G. Motzger
Prepared in cooperation with the Arizona State Land Department W. Yf. Lane, Gonriasioner
, Ari zo na Peb.ruaiy 1951

CONTENTS

Abstract ............................
Introduction .......................... Purpose and cooperation ...................
Location ........................... Climatological data ..................... Previous investigations ................... Geology and its relation to ground water ............ Field vrork and maps ..................... Land forms and drainage ...*............... Geologic history ....................... Structure .......................... Pediments .......................... Hock descriptions ......................
Pre-Cambrian and pre-Cambrian (?) rocks .......... Paleozoic (?) sedimentary rocks ..............
Me so zoic (?) rocks .....................
Intrusive rocks .....................
Cretaceous (?) sedimentary rocks .............
Mesozoic and Ceno zoic rocks ................
Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks ..........
Cenozoic (?) rocks ..................... Tertiary (?) conglomerate and alluvium ......'.... Origin of Tertiary (?) alluvium ............
Cenozoic rocks ....................... Quaternary (?) volcanic rocks .............. Quaternary sedimentary deposits ............. Caliche-cemented fangle merate ............. Alluvium ........................
Ground-water resources ..................... Occurrence and movement of ground vrater ........... Recharge to ground water ................... Discharge of ground water .................. Agricultural development ................... Safe yield of the ground-water reservoir ...........
Quality of water ........................ Summary and conclusions ....................

1
1 1
2 2 2 3 3 1 4 5 6 6 6 7
3
8
9
10
10
11 11 12 12 12 13 13 13 lU lU lU 15 15 15 17 IS

TABLBS

Summary of climato logical data, 1909-^0, Salome, Yuma County, Ariz, .......................................
Summary of climate logical data, 1918-U-O, Quartzite, Tuma County, Ariz .........................................
Records of '-rells in northern part of Ranegras Plain area, Tuma County, Ariz. ..................................
Logs of veils in northern part of Ranegras Plain area. ....... Analyses of ^-jater samples from wells in northern part
of Ranegras Plain area. ...................................

19
20
21 29
31

ILLUSTRATIONS
Plate 1. KSD of northern part of Ranegras Plain area, Yuma County, Ariz.
2. A, Looking northwest dovm the Rsnegras Plain from the "st'/J-StfJ- sec. 9, T. 5 ff,, R. 16 W. Crowder cattle well is in left center and the Bouse Hills are in the background; 13, Looking east across the Ranegras Plain toward the Granite Wash Mountains from same locality.
3- A, Tuff exposed on the east slope of Pyramid Peak, The dark stratum is red fine-grained, equigranular tuff of cretaceous and Tertiary age; 33, Looking west at Ibur Peaks. Tiie mountain is probably a volcanic neck of Cretaceous and Tertiary age.
U.. A, Caliche-cemented fanglomerate formed on a hill of Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks. The outcrop is 2 miles northeast of Bouse, on the west side of the Bouse Hills; B, Looking northeast at an outcrop of caliche-cemented fanglomerate on the slope of a hill composed of Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks, about ^ miles east of Bouse c

GEOLOGY AND GROUND-WATER RESOURCES OP THE NORTHERN PAHE OP THE RANEGRAS PLAIN AREA; YUMA COUBTY, ARIZONA . .

-. -.i : " ~ "." ... .." , By- , - ;:- / . ' ' " ' ' ' ' - " : ' '

D. G. Metzger

ABSTRACT \

The Ranegras Plain area is part of the Basin and Range -orovince in west-

central Arizona.^

.- -..-'-..

'.-...

.- . .;*. .

The report discusses rocks of pre-Cambrian, pre-Cambrian (?), Paleozoic

(?), Mesozoic (?), Cretaceous (?), Cretaceous and Tertiary, Tertiary (?),

Quaternary (?)» and Quaternary age. All the Paleozoic (?) and Cretaceous (?)

rocks and parts of the Mesozoic (?)/Cretaceous and Tertiary, and Tertiary (?)

rocks have been .mapped as a unit "because they are so intensely faulted that

detailed mapping was not practical* Rocks older than Quaternary form the .

mountain ranges "bordering the Ranegras Plain. Quaternary alluvium underlies

the "broad, gently sloping valley floor to depths of generally a few- hundred

feet, locally more, 'veil logs indicate that the underlying Tertiary (?)

alluvium exceeds 1,100 feet in thickness.

The structure of the area is controlled "by faulting typical of the Basin

aad Range province, "but the major faults are covered "by alluvium and are in-

ferred from topographic features. .- -.-.-. . -.

Ground water occurs in Quaternary and Tertiary (?) alluvium and the "best

aquifers are in sand and gravel of the Quaternary alluvium. Ground-water

movement is, in general, to the northwest.

^ : . :. . i.

Recharge to the aquifers is predominantly from stream flow resulting from

heavy rains. There is also minor 02 unevaluated recharge from underflow from

Butler Valley to the east, and since 19^8 seepage from irrigation. ' - '-"

Discharge is "by pumping and by natural processes of underflow and evapo-

transpiration. In addition to small domestic ani stock wells, only two irriga-

tion wells, in the vicinity of Utting, are in use. ITo accurate data on pump-

age are available. -.- - ] .-.' -- ' --: -

; , * -^'.'.---r :'-*

The safe yield from the ground-»'/ater reservoir may be less than 5»000: acre-feet and probably does not exceed 10,000 to 15»000 acre-feet per year.
The quality of ground '-rater ranges from permissible to unsuitable for , irrigation purposes. The fluoride content is generally too high for the *;ater to be considered satisfactory for use by young children.
" ' -= 7-L n; -.-:.".-. r: -. «. c '- : ': .- ' ' .'--"- ' ' '^ ,cV^>^

--"- " INTRODUCTION

--, . .

.L' :. s2-

;.;-...- -,

,.- .~..- :.. PURPOSE. AND COOPERATION

. -.\ , , I .-- . :-.r- -

The increased use of ground water in the State of Arizona has called atten-

tion: to\the need for State regulation of the development and use- of. ground ~ "'- :-

water. :Such.,regulation must be, based upon adeq.uate information as;to the:

quantity, q.uality, and use of the ground water, and on its source and move-

ment. Therefore, the State Legislature in 1939 and in subsequent years has V--'

appropriated funds for investigation of the ground-water resources of Arizona.

These investigations are made by the Geological Survey, United States Depart-

ment of the Interior, under a cooperative agreement with the Arizona State. :.: :.-,

Land Department.

*-

,"- : ,o-V -:? :« I

5*1 eld work in the Banegras Plain area was done "by D. G. Metzger, H. 2.

Skibltzke, and G. E. Hazen between Ifovember 19^8 and June 19^9 and ln February

1950, under the general supervision of S. ? Turner, District Engineer (Ground

Vater) of the Geological Survey. Water analyses were made by chemists under

$he general direction of J. D. Hem, District Chemist of the Geological Survey.

Albuquerque, H. Hex*

-"

IOOATION

The area included in this investigation is in northern Tuma County, Arizona
It includes the northern part of the Banegras Plain and is known locally as
the "Bouse country* because Bouse is the largest settlement in the area. The area described is bounded on the north by the Bouse Hills, on the east by the
Granite Wash Mountains, on the west by the Plomosa Mountains, and on the south by an east-west line at latitude 33° 40' , U miles south of Hope* The plain extends approximately 25 miles southeast of latitude 33° ^'» beyond the area described in this report. The present investigation was limited to the area north of that line because no aerial photographs were available for the area to the south and because all development of ground water for irrigation has been to the north.

CUMPOIOGICAL DATA

The climate of the Hanegras Plain area is characterised by hot, dry stammers and mild winters. Ifo climatological data.are available for this area* but U. S. Weather Bureau records have been kept at the nearby towns of Salome and Quart zite. Tables 1 and 2 show that the average annual precipitation at the two localities is 8.56 and 6.0^ inches, respectively. The Banegras Plain area is between Salome and Quart zite, and the average annual precipitation on the area is estimated as 7 Inches.

PHS7IOUS INVESTIGATIONS

!. .

Generalized statements regarding the geology and ground-water resources of the Hanegras Plain area are made in the following report st

Lee, W. T., Geologic reconnaissance of a part of western Arizona; U. S. Geol.

Survey Bull* 352, 1908.

"-

Bancroft, Eowland, Reconnaissance of the ore deposits in northern Tuma County, ri U. S, Geological Survey Bull. Ujl. 1911.

Jones, X. L. , Jr., and Hansome, ?. L., Deposits of manganese ore in Arizona! U, S. Geol. Survey Bull. 710-D, pp. 182-183, 1920.

3ryan, Kirk, Erosion ard sedimentation in the Papago country, Ariz., with a 1 sketch>; of -the geology; U. S. Geol* Su'r' vey Bu~ll.& ~730-B, pp. 52-66, 1922.

.foes, C. P., Geology of the lower Gila region, Ariz.r U» S. Geol. Survey Prof.

Paper 129-H, pp. 18>197, 1922. -

--

3oss, C. P., The lower Gila region, Arijs.: 0. S. Geol. Survey VJater- Supply Paper ^8. 1923.

3

Darton, ff. H., A resume of Arizona ^eolcrgy: ' Univ". Arizona, Arizona Bur. Mnes

Bull. 119. PP- 221-223, -

''

Wilson, B. D., Cunningham, JVB., and Butler, Gr. M., Arizona lode gold mines and gold mining! TTniy. Arizona, Arizona Bur. fines Bull. 137. pp. -131*-

Turner, S. P., and others, Pumpage and ground-water levels in Arizona in 191*6: n. S. G-eol. Survey (mimeographed),

Turner, S. F., and others, Pumpage and ground-^pter levels in Arizona in U. S. Geol. Survey (mimeographed) , 19^9

Turner, S. P., and others, Pumpage and ground- water levels in Ari-zona in

U. S. Oeol. Survey (mimeographed), 19^9*

- - .--..-_ ... . - _. . _ . ~

SSDIOQY Alg? ITS H3LATIOU TO GROUND V/AT1R ' ' '

FIELD WDRK A11D MAPS

The geologic work vas of a reconnaissance nature because the time available and the purpose of the investigation did not warrant more detail. The geologic mapping was done entirely on contact prints of aerial photographs, as no accurate maps of the area were available. The photographs were made in part by the II. S» Army and in part specifically for this project. The base map (pi. 1) was prepared from photographs, township plata, and U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Data*

LAND TOEMS AMD DRAINAGE

"-

The Ranegras Plain is part of the Basin and Range province,^/ which

.

Fenneman, N. M., Physiographic divisions of the United States! Assoc. Am.

Annals, vol. 6, pp. 19-98, 1916.

"' ": ;-

:

occupies a large part of the southwestern United States. The land surface

of the plain slopes gently northwest (see i>ls. 2 A and B). Bouse r-rash and its

tributaries constitute the drainage system of the area. -

..--..

The plain is ^bordered on the north by the Bouse Hills, on the east byv

the Granite 1'Tash l>ountains, and on the west by the Plomosa Kountains. Both

the Granite '"ash Fountains and the Plorcosa I'-ountains have gently rolling slopes

on the east. Their western slopes, however, are extremely sharp and rugged.

The Bouse Hills are considerably lower and less rugged than the other mouni-

tains in the area.

- ' ~ ' '-' '" v ;

' ': -~ " '-'- * " ' - "- -

The area drained by Bouse Wash includes: (1) Butler Valley, (2) the ex-

treme western part of KcKullen ^alley through Granite I/ash Pass, and (3) the

Ranegras Plain. An aerial reconnaissance of the area revealed that the drain-

age in the southern part of the Ranegras Plain is the reverse of that shown

on the old maps of the area, and that the drainage area is much greater than

it was assumed to be by Bancroft.^/ '" - :. --.-;

.-

--

g/ . : . .

.» ...'- '. ,' ", f _:-;. ' -,-" ' i ' :.?* ,i"," ~ : c r

Bancroft, Howland, Reconnaissance of the ore deposits in northern Tuxna County. Ariz.J U, S. Geol. Survey Bull, ^51. ul. 1, 1911.

The surface drainage in the Granite Vaah fountains presents a physiograohi
problem. The drainage divide is not in the hard rocks of the mountains but in the alluvial fill on the eastern side. The extreme southern part of Butler Valley, for example, drains westward through the mountains rather than north-* ward to Cunningham Hash. The drainage divide between McKullen Valley and the Hanegras Plain is in the alluvial fill approximately 2 miles vest of Salome and not in the mountains at Granite Wash Pass, as would be expected. The drainage of the eastern part of McMullen Valley is to the southwest. Two miles east of Salome the drainage swings abruptly to the southeast and follows this course through the Harquahala Mountains Into Centennial Wash. Hoss3/

Boss, C. P., The lower Gila region, Ariz.J U. S. Geol. Survey Vater-Supply Paper 1*98, pp. 39^1*0, 1923;

postulates that the drainage of #cMullen Valley probably was originally through Granite Wash Pass and that * heedward erosion by Centennial Wash captured the
drainage. The most prominent wash in the Bouse Hills drains southwest into Bouse
'Vaah. The channel cuts through volcanic rocks Instead of alluvium 2j miles southeast of Bouse. This course Bossibly represents the downward continuation
of a channel that originated on a higher alluvial surface. A remnant of this surface still exists as a ridge paralleling the channel on the south side*

- GJDIOGIC HISTOBT

Gneiss and schist, regarded as pre-Cambrian in age, are the oldest known

rocks in the area. These rocks form the backbone of the Plomosa fountains

and the northern part of the Bouse Hills* During pre-Cambrian time granite

was Intruded into the rocks and the area was eroded to form a surface of low

relief. The area was then covered by advancing sease in which thick deposits

of sediments were laid down. The sediments were later metamorphosed to form

the. slates, quart sites, schists, and recrystallized limestones that are now-

exposed in the Granite Wash fountains. By the end of pre-Cambrian time, -. - -, -

erosion again had reduced the land surface to one of low relief*

Limestone and quartzite in the Bouse Hills~and in the north part of the :

Plomosa Mountains are tentatively assigned Paleozoic age. - They indicate that .

the area was again covered by seas during that time*

- . -~

The absence of any rocks that can be identified as Trlassic or Jurassic ,

suggest that the region was uplifted and subject to erosion during early

Tesozoie time. : . -. Sv .-..-. -' ,

- - ,. .- -

..

later in Mesozolc (?) time-, magmas intruded the nocks and crystallized

to form the granitic rocks now-1 .exposed In the Granite Wash fountains and in «,

the complex area in the northern Plomosa Mountains. Still later the sea again

advanced upon the land and conglomerate, shale, and limestone were deposited.

These rocks are exposed in the northern Plomosa Mountains. Interbedded tuff

deposits indicate the beginning of the volcanic activity that took place -;

during Cretaceous and Tertiary time*-

: ,- , : f

..

-:«;

Cretaceous and early Tertiary time was characterized by volcanic activity

and the formation of various types of volcanic rocks. The flows ranged in t :

character from basic to acidic, the basic type being heavily predominant* Most

of the flows were of the quiet type that issued from fissures, but there are

deposits of ash, tuff, and agglomerate which indicate explosive activity during

this period. - The mountain locally known as Four Peaks, 6 miles southwest of

Bouso, appears to "be A volcanic neck and was possibly the source of some of

the ejecta. Intervals during which vulcanism was interrupted and deposition

of sedimentary materials occurred are marked "by a few "beds of sandstone*

Toward the end of the major vulcanism, uplift and "block faulting gave the

mountain masses the general trends they have today. A period of vigorous ere-

sion "as started, the highlands were reduced, and the debris was deposited

in the lowlands. A conglomerate marks the deposition and consolidation of the

first products of this erosion.

-

During late Tertiary time at least 1,100 feet of sand and clay of estuarin-

or lacustrine origin was deposited in the area. Some vulcanism occurred during

this period, as shown "by the water-deposited ash and "bento nit ic clay near Bouse

During the Quaternary period vulcanism diminished and the lava flows were

thin. Tilted Quaternary "basalt flows give evidence of continued earth movement*

long alluvial ridges considerably higher than the present valley floor

probably represent remnants of alluvial surfaces that existed during the Pleis-

tocene epoch. Erosion resulting from uplift or climatic Changes, or both,

gradually reduced these higher land surfaces to the present level of the plain.

Recent alluvium is represented "by the sands and gravels in the washes

that drain the area.

STRUCTUEE

Faulting played an important part In the formation of the mountains that

border the Ranegras Plain. Most geologists believe that the main structural

feature of the Basin and Range province is block faulting, the mountains

representing horsts and the valleys representing grabens. Most of the major

bounding faults are covered by alluvium and can be inferred only from topo-

graphic features.

Faulting in the Ranegras Plain area probably started with the pre-Cambrian

granitic intrusions and has continued until the present time. The greater

part of the recognisable fasiltirig"undoubtedly occurred during Cretaceous and

Tertiary time. Faulting within the mountain masses shows a predominantly north-

vest trend, corresponding with the structural trend of the region. The Hanegrat

Plain itself is elongated northwest.

-.

. _ ' ' '.'

The northern Plomosa !'ounta?.ns and the isolated hills northwest of Bouse

are structurally complex. The rocks have been so severely faulted and folded:

that much detailed work would harre to be done to work out more than the general

structural features. Jbur miles west of Bouse, for example, pre-Cambrian :

gneiss and schist are faulted against limestones of Cretaceous,(?) age. The

gneiss also forms the hanging wall in a reverse fault against limestone and

nuartzite tentatively assigned Paleozoic age. Vest of Bouse the contact -..r .

between bedrock and alluvium forms a conspicuous, almost straight line that

probably reflects a major bounding fault. .

:-.- : ..i-

In the southwestern part of the area the Plomosa Mountains are composed

of -volcanic rocks dipping southwest. Gentle folding is reflected in the gra-

dually curving strike of the lava flows. A prominent fault parallels the ~

mountain front on the northeast side. It is visible for approximately U miles

along the strike* . .

., .,-.......,...,. - ^ t . . . .. -» r ; _ * -. .-_ -,

To the northwest, near Ibex Mountain, is another fault that curves in

a broad arc in an approximate north-south direction. The trace of this fault

is easily seen on aerial photographs.

, . - _r

In the northern part of the Granite Wash Mountains are topographic features

* that probably indicate fault control. These features include a ridge extending

northwest from Salome Peak and a large wash to the southwest that parallels the ridge.
Fault structure is displayed in the row of volcanic hills south of Hope* In this area t"o periods of faulting can be distinguished. During late Tertiary time the Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks were tilted to the southwest. Basalt of probable Quaternary age flowed over them, and again the hills v/ere tilted to the southwest. The dip of the older volcanics is 18°; the dip of the basalt is 8°. A similar series of volcanic rocks was observed south of TJ. S. Highway 60-70 in the Plomosa Mountains. Detailed work might prove that the rock of the two areas could be correlated.
PEDIMENTS
Hock pediments, as described by Bryan^/ were observed in various places
WJ - . Bryan, Xirk, Erosion and sedimentation in the Papago country, Ariz.: IT. S.
5eol. Survey Bull. 730-B, pp. 52-65. 1922.

along the mountain borders. They are usually formed on granitic rocks, an
exception being the pediment near Vicksburg which is formed on metamorphic rocks. The largest pediment areas are: (l) along the northern border of the Bouse Hills, (2) along the southeastern and eastern borders of the Bouse Hills,
(3) northwest of Ibex fountain in the Plomosa Fountains, and (U) along the southwestern border of the Granite Wash Ilountains.

BOCK EESCP.IPTICBS

Pre-Cambrian and pro-Cambrian (?) rocks

Bocks regarded as pre-Cambrian In age include metamorphic and granitic

rocks in the Bouse Hills and Plomosa fountains and metamorphosed sedimentary

rocks in the Granite Y/ash Mountains.

The gneiss that constitutes the backbone of the Plomosa fountains is

possibly the oldest rock in the area. It is locally schistose. It is Imper-

meable except where fractured. Although wells drilled in fracture zones might

yield small quantities of ground water, the gneiss is considered of little

value for the storage or transmission of water.

Gneiss of pre-Cambrian age appears as a small outcrop in the central part

of the Bouse Hills. The gneiss has been intruded by granite and is schistose

along the contact. The gneiss is coated with dark "desert varnish," and from

a distance the hills have the appearance of being capped by basalt.

Intrusive rocks of probable pre-Cambrian age crop out northwest of Ibex

Fountain. The intrusive rocks are syenite cut by a dike complex. The syenite

is composed of orthoclase and biotlte and is coarse-grained and locally gneissoid.

It has been cut by dikes to such an extent that the dikes cover a greater sur-

face area than the syenite. The dikes are extremely fine-grained and are of

both the acidic and basic types. Although there are no known wells in those

rocks, wells sunk in fracture zones or along dikes might produce small quantities

of ground water.

'

Granite regarded as pre-Cambrian in age, yet younger than the previously

described rocks, crops out in an extensive area in the eastern and northeastern

parts of the Bouse Hills. The granite is medium- to coarse-grained and white

to gray ia color. It is composed of orthpclase, quartz, and varying amounts of the subordinate "basic minerals, principally biotlte. It is locally ,'^eissoid» T^6 granite is cut "by many fine-grained aplitic and dia"basic dikes from a fraction of an inch to U feet in width. The granite is considered of little value for the storage or transmission of ground water "because it is practically impermeable.
Metamorphosed sedimentary rocks, tentatively assigned pre-Cambrir.n age, are exposed in an extensive area in the Granite Wash Mountains. The metamorphosed sedimentary rocks are probably younger than the metamorphic rocks in the Plomosa Mountains, and it is jpossible that they may be, in part. Paleozoic in age* DartonS/ assigned some of the metamorphosed limestones in this area
Darton, N... H., A resume of -Arizona geology: Hniv. Ariz-ona, Arizona Bur.
Mines Bull. 119, P- 223? 1925. .,..;. -'.'' ^ /.'

to the Paleozoic. The metamorphosed sedimentary rocks are principally mica schist and smaller amounts of slate, quartzite, and recrystallized limestone. They dip, generally^northeagt, from 20° to 60°. Many variations in the dip and strike pattern are caused by faulting and minor folding. The schist is relatively impermeable except along fractures and is considered of little hydrologic importance* The slate, quartzite and limestone are dense and compace except where fractured, and their value as aquifers is questionable. v; ella in fracture zones in the limestone might yield small quantities of ground water.
Paleozoic (?) sedimentary rocks

Small outcrops of limestone and quartzite of Paleozoic (?) age occur throughout the areas of the sedimentary and igneous complex shown on plate 1. These rocks, as well as other rock units in the complex areas, have been subjected to intricate faulting and folding and the relations between the various rock types are so complicated that it was impossible to map the units separately in the limited time "available for the investigation. _
:T The Paleozoic (T) limestone is gray, massive, and crystalline and is
interbedded with a fine-grained quartzite. Hoss^/ states, "near the Little

.....

. ,.....-

Boss, C. P., The lower Gila region, Ariz»! .1U. S. Geol. Survey Water-Supply

Paper Ugg, p. igl*. 1923.

.- - -

........

Butte mine . . . are limestones litho logically similar to those at the Socorro mine, In the Earquahala Mountains,"and hence progagly Paleozoic*" DartonT/

. .,. . . ... .

... .,

.

Darton, N. H., A resra& of Arizona geology} Univ. Arizona, Arizona 3ur» Mines

Bull. 119, pp. 218-219, 1925." "' - v : _ ;. :.. -. ,. : . y . -

mentions limestone « * quartzite strata that "resemble strata in vdiich Carboniferous fossils have been found" (at the Ear quahala Mine). It is probable that : rwoecrkesfooufndsimduirlialargagthe isweirne vdeesptoisgitaetdioinn/'t'h"'e" 'Ra"negras'--Plai-n' -"area. : Bo- f.o--s%si.l.s- ?~

8
The limestone and quartzite of Paleozoic (?) age are.not regarded as important sources of ground water, as the rocks are relatively impermeable. fells stink in fracture zones might yield small quantities of ground water.
Meso zoic (?) rocks
Intrusive rocks
Intrusive rocks regarded as Kesozoic (?) in age include: (1) a granite laccolith, (2) a stock of biotite granite and quartz monzonite, (}) a diabase stock, and (U) acidic and basic dikes. All these crop out in the Granite Wash 1'ountains. Also included is granite observed in the Plomosa {-fountains and in the isolated hills northwest of Bouse. This granite was not mapped with the fesozoic (?) intrusive rocks but is included in the sedimentary and igneous complex areas shown on the map (pi. 1).
The intrusive rocks in the Granite Wash Mountains were assigned by Bancroft^/ to the Mesozoic (?) era. He states:
17
Bancroft, Rowland, Reconnaissance of the ore deposits in northern Ttma County, Ariz.& U. S. Geol. Survey Bull. U51, p. 23, 1911*

The age* of the large and massive granite ... is not known.

Certainly it is younger than the pre-Cambrian strata through which

it cuts* Because of the fact that so many granite intrusions have

taken place in the Pacific States in Mesozoic time, this one is

assigned temporarily to that era, no fossils having been found in

the area either, to substantiate or disprove the correctness of the

assignment*

.

..

jib evidence was'found during this investigation to change his designation.

The granite in the Plomosa Mountains .and in the isolated hills northwest

of Bouse is regarded as Mesozoic (?) in age on the basis of lithological

similarity to the younger granites of southern Arizona that have been referred

to the Mesozoic (?).9/

..

a/ Wilson, 2, D», Geology and mineral deposits of southern Ttma County: Univ. Arizona, Arizona Bur, Mines Bull. 13^ p. 28, 1933*

The laccolith in the Granite Wash Mountains, T. 6 U., Ss. lU and 15 V. f is a coarse-grained biotite granite composed of orthoclase feldspar, quartz, and biotite. It weathers to a tan color. The base of the laccolith is plainly discernible. At one locality, 7 ailes H. 15° 3. from 7icksburg, the
oetamorphic rocks strike N, 70° W. and dip 35° to Uo° NE under the granite.
The top of the laccolith is difficult to trace because it highly metamorphosed the overlying rock.
Coarse-grained biotite granite and quartz monzonite crop out over a large area on both sides of IT. S. Highway 60-70 in the vicinity of Granite ''/ash Pass.
This may be part of the same general intrusion that formed the laccolith farther north. The biotite granite occupies the center of the outcrop area, and the
quartz-monzonite occurs around the circumference. The biotite granite weathers

grayish tan zzst In, a crumbling uneven manner.

A diabase Intrusive is exposed 1 mile northeast of Hope. The rock.is

composed of pl^Iodase phenocrysts in a "basic ground mass. It is slightly

schistose in pisses and is of sufficient size to tie classed as a small stock.

Dikes of floe-grained aplita and diabase occur as intrusives in the granite

laccolith. fh& dikes have a general northwest trend and are as much as 200

feet in width. She granite-monzonite stock is cut "by small pegmatite dikes,

"by fine-graiced light-colored dikes of quartz and orthoclase, and "by "basic

dikes of a dark-green color. Ho evidence was found to assign these dikes to

a definite age group. For convenience, they are classed with the Hesozoic (?)

intrusive rocks, .,

.. -

The granite in the Plomosa Mountains and in the isolated hills northwest

of Bouse is coarse-grained and locally gneissoid. It is .pink but has a greenis}

tinge caused V vsathering. Outcrops of the granite occur within the sedimen-

tary and igneotL3 complex areas shown on the map (pi. 1) but were not separately

mapped, ,-

... ....

. , . '. .

The Mesozoic (?) intrusive rocks are impermeable except where fractured and are considered of little value for the storage or transmission of water.

Cretaceous (?) sedimentary rocks .

Conglomerate, shale, and limestone of Cretaceous (?) age occur only within

the sedimentary and igneous complex areas shown on plate 1. The basal conglom-

erate of Cretaceous (?) age is an arfcosic sandy conglomerate. It is generally

grayish \&ite, although locally it is reddish brown. The coarse-grained white

matrix is comoosed of orthoclase feldspar, quartz, and some mica, orthoclase

being the predominant mineral. The rounded, conglomeratic aggregate is

composed of granite, gneiss, quartzite, and fine-grained basic Igneous rocks.

Ife stratification was observed. The unweathered rock is well consolidated

but the matrix weathers easily, .leaving the.surface covered with rounded

pebbles.

, ; .._"' '.

, '-

The shale and limestone strata lie conformably on the basal conglomerate.

The shale is red, and the limestone ranges from reddish brown to yellow. The

rocks are.dense and even-layered; the limestone beds are more massive near

the top of the series. Ho fossils were found. .

.'~~~": " " u ,!.'." .

. The conglomerate shale, and limestone are tentatively classed as Creta-

ceous and are probably contemporaneous with the sedimentary rocks in southern

Tuma County described by McKee^£/ and tfllson.^^/ ,Vilson» Cunninghan, and ,. .

lO/ ....

.-.. ........ _.:.. . ' '..".. .'.'.--. T , /, "

HcKee, S. D., Paleozoic seaways in western Arizona: ' Am. ASSOC, Petroleum

Geologists Bull.. Tol. 31, no. 2, pp. 282-292, 191*7. ,

"

... ,.. .

...

Wilson, E. D., Geology and Mneral resoiifces of southern Tuma County,

Ariz.: tlniv* Arizona, Arizona Bur. Mines Bull. 13^, pp.; JO, 80, 1933«

. 1O-

' ---

«r- .-

-,.-.

_ .-.,..

. -.

.. . ....

Butler,_/ describing mines in the northern part of the Plomo.sa Mountains

.
Wilson, E. D,, Cunningham, J. B. ( and Butler, G-. M. f Arizona lode gold mines and go-ld- mining: -U- n-iv- . Arizona-, A-r.i.z;o.n,a..B.-ur-.-M,.ines. 'B. u- ll. ..1.3.7. pp.

10 ;
mention "probable Cretaceous shales and metamorphosed sedimentary rocks of jrobable Cretaceous age."
The conglomerate, shale, and limestone of Cretaceous (?) age are not regarded as important sources of ground water, as the rocks are relatively impermeable. Veils sunk in fracture zones migit yield small quantities of ground water.

Mesozoic and Cenozoic rocks

Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks

The Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks include lavas that range from

light-.colored rhyolite to dark-gray, almost black andesite and basalt and

deposits of ash, tuff, and agglomerate.

"

..'.--

The oldest rocks in this unit are probably the volcanic sedimentary rocks

2 miles northeast of Bouse. They are mapped with the sedimentary and igneous

complex areas. The deposits consist of light-colored tuff and agglomerate

interbedded with darfc-red arkose. The tuff and agglomerate are thin-bedded,

well sorted, very tightly cemented, and water-laid*

Southeast of Ibex Mountain the volcanic rocks are basalt, andesite, and

some agglomerate. These rocks dip southwest. Interbedded with this sequence

near IT. S. Highway 60-70 is approximately 20 feet of yellowish-green and red

coarse-grained sandstone.

A reddish sandstone was observed in the western part of the Bouse

Hills. The deposit is underlain and overlain by basalt regarded as Cretaceous

and Tertiary in age. The fine- to coarse-grained sandstone is well stratified

and firmly consolidated and is approximately 3 feet thick. Its ttresence .

indicates a brief break in the vulcanise.

Another rock included in the Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic series

is a white thin-bedded compact tuff. Deposits of this material were ob-

served in a small area in the southwestern part of the Bouse Hills and also

In the Plomosa Mountains approximately 6 miles north of U. S. Highway 60-70.

The tuff is underlain and overlain by light-colored volcanic ash.

South of Hope in Pyramid Peak is a sequence of volcanic rocks capped

*ith basalt. Particularly prominent is a layer approximately 20 feet thick

of fine-grained equigranular tuff. (See pi. 3 ^») It i fl red faintly laminated

and semiconaolidated. The tuff is friable and appears to be held together

by compaction and by the weak cementing effect of a ferruginous coating on"

the grains. The red tuff is overlain by scoriaceous agglomerate which, in

turn, is capoed by basalt.

.-- ._._.,...

._.-~7, _

The deposits of ash, tuff, and agglomerate found in the Eanegras Plain

area indicate explosive activity during Cretaceous and Tertiary time. The

only probable aonce of explosive material recognized is the mountain known

as Tour Peaks (see pi. 3 J3)» 6 miles southwest of Bouse. This mountain is. .

orobably a volcanic neck. The rock is composed of quartz phenocrysts in a -^

light-red ground mass. J

'

"'."'....

Fine-grained basaltic rocks regarded as Cretaceous and Tertiary in age

are the predominant lavas in the sedimentary and Igneous complex area in the

northern Plomosa Mountains. Associated with these lavas are diabase dikes

that cut the older rocks of the complex.

"'

The lavas in the northern Plomosa Mountains and Bouse Hills are*, for the

nost part, highly fractured and faulted and should offer opportunity for the-

downward percolation of crater, but no wells are known that produce from this

init. The lava flows in the remainder of the area are more continuous and"'

11

" .. "'

-

*,

are impermeable except where fractured* . Most of the water-laid tuffs assoc-

iated with the lavas are dense, compact, and relatively impermeable. An

exception is the porous red tuff found in Pyramid Peak south of Hope. This

was the only outcrop observed, but the tuff may.exist beneath talus-covered*

slopes in other volcanic hills in the vicinity "and may extend out under the

valley. If the areal extent is considerable, the tuff-might be important

as an aquifer. .. - --.

. - ,v

Cenogoic (?) rocka

Tertiary (?) conglomerate and alluvium

Included in the sedimentary and igneous complex area v;est of Bouse, and

not se-narately mapped, is a dark-red semi-consolidated fairly well sorted

conglomerate of Tertiary (?) age. The outcrops weather into rounded, ele-

ohant-back-like hills. Paint stratification separates coarse- and fine-grained

layers. The- coarse aggregate is composed predominantly of lava fragments and

lesser amounts of fragments of gneiss and intrusive rocks. The pebbles and

boulders are subangular to subrounded. The finer aggregate is composedv,

principally of volcanic rocks and quartz and the fragments are not so well

rounded as those of the coarse aggregate. The conglomerate is cut by a few

small -faults. It is tilted very steeply in one place., but elsewhere it dins

gently.

.~

. . - . -:

The conglomerate Drobably was formed after the major vulcanism of

Cretaceous and Tertiary time and before the deposition of the estuarine or

lacustrine beds of late Tertiary time. The conglomerate IB lithologically

similar to one described by Lasky and Vebber^-3/ in the Artillery Mountains

.Lasky, S. G-., and t<febber, B, H., Manganese resources of the Artillery Mountains region, Mohave County, Ariz.: U*-S. Geol. Survey Bull. 961, 19^9.

of southern Mohave County, Ariz. They named it the Sandtrap conglomerate and . tentatively assigned it to the upper Pliocene.
The Tertiary.(?) conglomerate is tightly cemented and has not been faulted as much as the other units of the complex. It is regarded as of little value for the storage or transmission of ground water. . In the report, Tertiary (?) alluvium is restricted to the clay and smaller amounts of sand.and gravel of estuarine or lacustrine origin. The upt>er part of these sediments may be of Pleistocene age but no fossils were found in the beds and they are classed as Tertiary (?). The thickness of this material is unknown but logs of wells in the area show that it exceeds 1,100 feet.
The only known exposure of the Tertiary (?) alluvium is at the mouth of a mine tunnel a mile east of Bouse, where beds of ash and clay are in fault contact with lavas tentatively assigned Cretaceous or Tertiary age. The exposure was too small to map. It is possible that the clay is related to similar deposits penetrated in the deep irrigation wells in the valley (see table U). The logs of the irrigation wells west of Desert Wells show predominantly clay and small amounts of sand from 100 to 800 feet, and coarser material from approximately SOO to 1,2^2 feet, the maximum depth attained. The log of one well near Utting shows "hard red shale, red clay, etc." from about 8>50 feet to a total depth of 1,269 feet. Possibly the clay was originally as little as 100 feet, below the present surface level in the vicinity of Utting, but subsequent channeling removed much of the clay.

12
Origin tf Tertiary (?) alluvium. Although the lower part of the valley fill of the Sanegras Plain ia tertiary'(?) in age, considerable doubt exists as to the conditions Tinder which the sediments were deposited* Though the few deep wells in the area hare penetrated materials similar to those described by Xhechtel^yand Turner^?/ near Safford, Ariz«, which are considered
ii/ Znechtel, M. M. , Geology and ground-water resources of the -valley of the
Gila Hiver and San Simon Creek, Graham County, Ariz.: t7. S, Geol. Surrey Water-Supoly Paper 796-F. pp. 196-200, 193S.
Turner, S. P., Ground-water resources and problems of the Safford Basin, Aria.: IT. S. £eol. Surrey (mimeographed),
lacustrine, there is no basis for actual correlation of the de-ooaita in the two areas other than physical similarity, as no fossils were found in the area covered by this investigation. However, because lakes vere known to have been common in this region during Pleistocene time,^/ it is'possible that
Meinzer, 0. *$., Map of fthe Pleistocene lakes of the Basin and 3azurs province and its significance: fteol. Soc. America Bull., vol. 33» no. 9> PP» 5^1-552, 1922.
the lacustrine theory of origin may apply here. The Tertiary (?) alluvium may contain good.aquifers in some places, but
the specific capacity of a well may be small because of the great abundance of clay. A well may be expected to produce- sufficient water for domestic use, and locally wells may produce sufficient water for irrigation.
has described outcrops of marine sediments along the Colorado
UJ
Vilaon, E. D., Geology and mineral deposits of southern 7uma County, Ariz,* ITniv. of Arizona, Arizona Bur. Mines Bull. IjU, pp. 31-32, 1933.
Biver near Cibola, approximately 50 miles southwest of Bouse. He found fossils in "approximately 1,000 feet of well-stratified, weakly consolidated marls and sandstone. n The fossil types found, indicated brackish 'vater from a marine invasion of -Miocene or Pliocene age, Wilson also described an outcrop in Osborne Vash approximately 15 miles northwest of Bouse. He states, ^bhe same formation underlies basalt and rests upon tilted, beveled, red .beds. At that locality, Blanchard and Hose found it: to contain two brackish-water fossil species." Vith these extensive marine deposits nearby, it is possible that the clays Penetrated by the deep wells in the Sanegras Plain represent deposits in an estuary.
Cenozoic rocks
Quaternary (?) volcanic rocks
Dark-gray vesicular olivine basalt of Quaternary (?) age occurs- in

numerous places in the Banegras Plain area. Outcrops were found in the southern and southwestern parts of the Bouse Hills. Other outcrops occur on .two isolated "black hills 3 miles west of Vicksburg. Basalt also occurs on the southwest side of Pyramid Peak. The only basalt of probable Quaternary age observed in the Plomosa Mountains was that in the vicinity of IT. S. High'-;ay 60-70.
The Quaternary (?) flows are thin and are small in areal extent. They are not regarded.as an important potential source of ground water.

Quaternary sedimentary deposits

*

Caliche-cemented fanelomerate. Small areas of caliche-cemented fanglomerat

occur at numerous places in the Plomosa Mountains,. in the Bouse Hills, in the

isolated hills northwest of Bouse, and in one locality in the Granite T<te.sh

Mountains, The fanglomerate is unstratified, well consolidated, and cemented

by caliche. It weathers to a jagged surface (see pi. U'A), "buff in color.

Caliche forms about half the rock, coarse aggregate the rest. There is no

soil in the caliche. * .

The fanglomerate forms vertical cliffs 10 to 20 feet high. The upper

surfaces of the outcrops slope more gently than the underlying bedrock. The

fanglomerate thickens down slope and is thickest at the vertical cliffs (see

pi. U B). Wherever observed it was formed on hard rocks. In the Granite Wash

Mountains, sec. 3&» T. 7 N.» H* 15 1%r .» the fanglomerate dips under the alluvium

of Butler .Valley. This was the only locality where the relation between the

fanglomerate and the alluvium could be seen. The fanglomerate was formed on

the slopes of the hills of volcanic rocks and limestone, and the coarse aggregate

is composed entirely of talus fromthe hills upon which the fanglomerate rests.

The absence of soil in the fanglomerate indicates that it was not formed as. ..

a normal alluvial deposit. Deposition near the shore of a lake is suggested

by the way the fanglomerate occurs at the same elevation around the hills on

which it is formed.

. The fanglomerate is very tightly cemented and has only a small area of

outcrop. It is not an aquifer.v " -

',' - -"

Alluvium. The Quaternary alluvium beneath the Sanegras Plain generally does not exceed a few hundred feet in thickness. The deposits are sand, gravel, and some clay. The sand and gravel form the best aquifers in the area. The two deep wells near Titting penetrated water-bearing sand and gravel between .-. 125 and 850 feet, and the wells have been successfully used for irrigation. V. "

It is probable that the materials found there were deposited in erosion channels
cut into the Tertiary (?) alluvium, and similar buried channels may exist , . elsewhere beneath the Banegras Plain,- - ' ""'"'_'""'," '-...". ,

There is no indication that the Hanegras Plain was ever drained" by a major stream, and the alluvium probably was deposited by ephemeral streams that flowed

only during periods of heavy rainfall, "here these streams emerged from the mountains and spread out upon the plains, 'the loss of velocity caused the deposition of coarse materials in the form of alluvial fans that were gradually

extended for some distance out from the mountains. The finer materials - clay and silt - were carried farther out and "deposited nearer the center of the

valley. . Therefore, .wells drilled in the center of the basin Vouldtend to be/^

poor producers, owing to the fineness of the materials. The best wells should

be those drilled in the coarser materials of the alluvial-fan deposits or in

gravel-filled channels. There is no topographic or geologic expression on_ .

the present surface of the plain that indicates where buried alluvial-fan depositr

or channels might be found. - -,- .-»

- - ' 2. '".'"'' ~ ^ ." "V "^" "-' - -

~A clay deposit, probably formed In a Hecent playa, was observed approxi-'-

14 .

mately a mile southeast of Bouse* .She high mineralization of the ground

water near the surface at Bouse is probably attributable to this playa

deposit*

-.

The youngest Quaternary alluvium, other than the Becent playa clay,

is the Becent sand and gravel in Bouse Wash and Curmlnghaa Wash and in the

beds of the many washes coming out of the mountains. It is not different-

iated from Quaternary alluvium on the map (pi. 1). The material is coarse, '

unsorted, and unconsolidated. It is through these deposits that the ground-

water reservoir receives most of its recharge.

RESOURCES

OCCDBBESCE AM) MOVEMENT 07 GEOUBD WATSR

Ground water occurs in both the Quaternary and the Tertiary (?) alluvium that forma the valley fill, but the best aquifers are found in the sand and gravel lenses of the Quaternary alluvium. The water table forma a comparatively uniform sloping surface, indicating that the alluvium is sufficiently permeable to allow horizontal and Vertical movement among lenses of sand and gravel* Southeastward, or upstream, along Bouse Wash, the slope of the water
table is less than that of the land surface, and the depth to water becomes progressively greater. Also, the slope of the water table is less than the slope of the ground surface from Bouse Wash toward the mountains (see pi. 1).
Ground-water movement is in the direction of the slope of the water table. In the Banegras Plain the movement of the ground water is predominantly north-
west. Some water moves southwest from Butler Valley and then northwest down the Banegras Plain. There appears to be a ground-water barrier about 2 miles northwest of Bouse* This is shown by the shallow depth so water (about 30
feet) near Bouse and for a mile downstream, then an increase to more than 100 feet in the next mile*
Lines of equal depth to water were drawn on the map (pi* 1) in parts of the area where the wells were most abundant* However, because so elevations were available, ground-water altitude contours could not be drawn*

B3JCEABGE TO GROUITD WATER

Becharge to the aquifers Of the Banegras Plain is derived from the following sources: (1) runoff from rainfall, (2) underflow from Butler Valley, and (3) seepage from irrigation.
There are no perennial streams in the area* Bouse Wash, Cunniagham Wash, and tributary washes from the mountains flow only after ' a heavy rain or cloudburst. It is probable that the largest recharge to the ground-water reservoir occurs from the stream flow resulting from these heavy rains. A study of the recharge to the grand-water reservoir in a typical desert wash was made by Babcoclc and Gushing. ~3/ and they state, "about half of the flow of
w Babcock, E* M. t and Gushing, S. M., Becharge to ground water from floods in a typical desert wash, Pinal County, Ariz*l 4m* Geophys. Union Trans.,
PP

^ueen Creek at the mouth' of its canyon was recharged to the ground water. ff Little or no recharge to ground-water storage results from moderate rain-
fall on desert areas. The greater part of the rainfall absorbed by the soil

is probably lost by evaporation and transpiration..^

15
'. _ !

Turner, S. 7., and others, Ground-water resources of the Santa Cru2 Basin, Ariz.J U. S. Geol. Survey (mimeographed), p. U2, 19*13,

Additional field work would have'to be done to determine the amount of

underflow from Butler Valley into the Raaegras Plain. The existence of a

ground-water barrier or constriction at the mouth of Butler Valley is indi

cated by the comparatively shallow depth to water in the SEj-SEjsSj sec. 9»

T. 7 B». H. 15 V., approximately 2 miles north of the mouth of the valley.

There the water is within 95 fes* of *ke surface, although 6 miles farther

upstream in Butler Valley the depth to water is approximately 2^0 feet. The

depth to water increases below the constriction or barrier to 173 f>eet at

fftting. .-.-,: .; - .''..-' " - : " - " "

Recharge from irrigation seepage is not important at present because the

amount of water applied is small.

..' "'''.."

DISCHARGE OF GROUND tfATSR

Discharge of ground water from the Ranegras Plain is by pumping and by the natural processes of underflow and evapo-transpiration.
As of February 19^9 toe pumping for irrigation exceeded that for domestic and cattle use.. The amount of water pumped in the Hanegras Plain is very smal compared with pumpage in the more highly developed basins in the State. Tvio irrigation wells near Utting were in use and about 1,000 acres were under irrigation. A third well was being placed in use near Desert TTells.
An important form of ground-water discharge is the underflow over the assumed ground-water barrier northwest of Bouse. The amount of water discharged by evapo-transpiration within the area is believed to be very small. Only in the vicinity of Bouse is the water table sufficiently near the surface to support phreatophytee, and even there it does not support a luxuriant growth similar to that along many other stream channels in the State*.

AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

. ....

Six irrigation wells, each approximately 1,000 feet deep, had been

drilled by Karen 1950* Of these, only two were in use. They are in sections

22 and 26, T. 6 5., R. l6 tf., near Utting* The static water levels in these

wells were l6g and 173 feet, respectively, below the surface in November

Bo pumping-test data are available, but it is reported that the wells are

good producers. -..

l.~f ~ - -' " -

' '' '\

The other four wells are in the southern part of the'area, near Desert

Wells. The static water levels of the four wells were between 125 &&<* ^32

feet below the surface of the ground when they were drilled. Only the veil

in sec. IS, T. U H., R, 15 W., produced more than 2,000 gallons per minute..

This production wa« accompli shed by gravtL-packing the well. The jpumping

lift (reported by the well driller) was approximately 300 feet.

-,

SAPB TIELD OP THE GROUZEX-WATER RESERVOIR

The quantity of water {safe yield) that can be pumped annually from the ground-water reservoir without depleting the supply available for continued economical pumping is of vital concern to people Interested in the agricultural

16

possibilities of the Hanegras Plain* In this case the maximum safe yield of the

ground-water reservoir can "be approximated "by estimating either the average

annual recharge to the "basin or the average annual discharge from the "basin

under natural conditions*

.

The average annual, recharge is the amount of rainfall and flood flow that

percolates to the ground-water reservoir* To evaluate this amount, it is

necessary to know the average anm-ioT rainfall, the drainage area of Bouse

Wash and its tributaries, the part of the rainfall appearing as surface runoff,

and the part of the runoff recharged to the aquifers. '

No climatological data are available for the Kanegras Plain. Tables 1

and 2 show that the average annual rainfall at Salome and Quartzite is £.56

and 6.0^ inches respectively. Because the Hanegras Plain is between the two

localities, the average annual rainfall is assumed to be 7 inches*

The drainage area of Bouse V'ash and its tributaries can be only estimated

because existing maps do not show accurately the drainage in the southeastern

part of the Ranegras Plain. An approximation of the drainage area is 1,550

square miles. Of this, about 20 percent or 300 square miles is mountainous.

Recharge to the aquifers occurs near the base of the mountains from run-

off resulting from normal rainfall in the mountainous areas. Heavy rains

result in flood flow and recharge in the lower reaches of Bouse and Cunning-

ham Washes where the washes have definite channels. -The determination of

the recharge rates would require extensive field vrork. The only area similar

to the Ranegras Plain in vhich the recharge rate has been determined, is the

Queen Creek area, Pinal County, Ariz, There, runoff from rainfall in mountain-

ous areas was about 8 percent of the average anmifll rainfall,20/ and approxi-

a? ; Turner, S. P., personal communication,

mately 50 percent of the runoff at the base of the mountains was recharged to the ground-water reserve Jr. 21/ The factor of 50 percent vas arbitrarily

Babcock, H. *.., and Gushing, E. K., op. cit.

reduced to 33 percent for the Ranegraa Plain area, because the conditions for

recharge are not as favorable as in the Queen Creek .are?. There is additional

recharge* of unknown amount, fromflood flows in the lower reaches of Bouse

and Ctinningham Washes. Though it conceivably could be equal to the recharge

near the mountainous areas, it probably is much less*

:.

Using the estimated figures for rainfall, drainage area, and percentage

of runoff reaching the ground-water reservoir as recharge, it is computed that

3tOCO acre-feet per year enters the ground-water reservoir from runoff result-

ing from normal rainfall in the mountainous .areas* Another 1,000 to 3,000

acre-feet per year may be recharged by flood flows along Bouse and Cunningham

Washes* Thus, according to this method of computation, the total recharge,

in round figures, may be about 5,000 acre-feet per year*

Another method of estimating the safe yield is to determine the amount

of ground water that is discharged from the basin. In the Banegras Plain area

the principal discharge occurs as underflow over-the-presumed barrier northwest

of Bouse*. The amount of underflow could be determined by* (l) Running earth-

resistivity probes to determine the width and ^thickness of the aquifers over-

..
lying the "barrier; (2) drilling wells to bedrock at' the barrier; (3) maiding pumping and recovery tests on several wells dud measuring drawdown and .' recovery in observation veils in the immediate vicinity, to.determine the coefficient of permeability of the aquifers; "and (U) leveling betvreen observe* tion wells to permit determining the hydraulic gradient. An estimate of the discharge can be made by assuming; an aquifer 100 feet thick and 2 miles V'ide, a hydraulic gradient of JO feet per mile, and an average field coefflci of permeability of 500. The field coefficient of permeabillty22/ is.the rate

22/

. ..

. ..-

,.< ..-. ......

Wenzel, L. X,, Methods for determining permeability of water-bearing

materials: U. S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 59^» .p» It

of flow, in gallons per"dayi through a L-fobt thickness of water-bearing materials 1 mile in width, (measured at right angles to the direction of flow) and under a hydraulic gradient of 1 foot per mile. Using these values, the average annual discharge is computed as about 7.500 acre-feet.
On the basis of the estimates of recharge and discharge, the safe yield from the ground-water reservoir of the Hanegras Plain area may be less than
5iOOO acre-feet per year. It probably does not exceed 10,000 to 15iOOO acre-feet. If irrigation development is expanded until the pumpage exceeds the safe annual yield,. the result will be a general, and continuing lovrering of the water level and, as shown "below, an increase in the mineral content of the ground vater. ..'*", '

QUALITY OF WATER

The analyses of ground water (table 5) are of 5 samples collected in

and of 11 samples collected in the period November 19Ug to J-'arch 19^9

These data indicate that the ground water is extremely varied in quality,

ranging in dissolved-so lids content from 390 to 3,700 parts per million*

Chloride, sulfate, sodium, and calcium are the predominant constituents

in the more"concentrated waters*'

.^ ",., ... '_.-. .

_

.Analyses.of ground vater from veils in the flat*lands near..the center

of the basin indicate that most of the vrater may be rated "permissible to.

doubtful" or ^doubtful to unsuitable" for irrigation use, as classified by

tfilcox£3/ with respect to specific conductance and percent sodium. The.

.. . . ...

'/ilcox, I. 7., The quality of vrater for irrigation use: TJ.. S. Dept. Agr,

Tech. Bull. 962, p. 26,

"

percentages of sodium usually exceed 60, and the application of such waters

to the land may. cause the soil to become relatively impermeable to the down-

ward movement of water.. The shallow ground water in the vicinity, of.Bouse

which has a dissolved solids concentration similar to that from well 36 may

be classified as unsuitable for irrigation*^ " . 1 . . . \,/

.

. Eost of the ground water in the basin contains enough dissolved mineral

matter to have a noticeably unpleasant taste. Near Bouse the water is high

in chloride, sulfate, and dissolved solids, Excluding the two wella in sec.

T. U N., R. 16 W., all other seinples showed the ground water to be very high

in fluoride, the range being from 3.8 to 8.9 parts per million. According tc

IS the U. S, Public Health Service^/ a satisfactory drinking water should contain

Public Health Service drinking water standards, 19^6: Public Health Septs., vol. 6l, no. 11, Reprint 2697, pp. 37^-^. Mar; 15,

no more than 1*5 parts per million of fluoride. Excessive amounts of fluoride nay eauae mottling of the tooth enaoel of children *fco drink such waters during the time their permanent teeth are forming.
The aoat dilute watera in the Banegraa Plain basin occur in the recharge areas. These areas are along the mountain bases and graveL- filled channels of washes. Ibr example, the well in sec. 15, T. ^ N., B. 16 *.'., is near the mountain front and the water is relatively low in dissolved solids* Likewise, the "ells in the SW£ see. 15. T. 7 #* 3. 17 *' are near Bouse Wash, and their waters are relatively low in dissolved solids, even though the water in some -of the nearby wells at Souse is highly mineralized* The occurrence of a less concentrated water in this vicinity is possibly due to recharge from fresher water flowing through the wash. The higily mineralized shallow "rater at Bouse is believed to reflect the influence of nearby deposits.
All the dissolved solids that leave the basin are carried out by the
surface flow and underflow of Bouse Wash. The accumulation of soluble salts in the basin will gradually increase as discharge from the basin, is decreased by pumping for irrigation. However, the effects can be minimized by providing adequate drainage structures to keep the water table from rising too near the surface in the irrigated tracts, and by providing the proper amount of excess irrigation to keep the soil flushed out.

SUMMARY Am CONCLUSIONS

The area included in this investigation is the northern part of the

Hanegras Plain, known- locally as the "Bouse country. 11 It is in : northern

Tuma Coutrty, Ariz.

:

Ground water occurs in the Quaternary and Tertiary ( ?) alluvium that

forma the valley fill. The beat aquifers are the sand and gravel lenses of

the Quaternary alluvium. The Tertiary (?) alluvium appears to be "tight"

because of the great abundance of clay, silt, and fine-grained sand. The

movement of ground water is predominantly northwest, although some water moves

southwest from Butler Valley and then northwest down the Sanegras Plain.

Recharge to the aquifers of the Hanegraa Plain is principally by runoff

from rainfall. Discharge of ground water is principally by underflow out of

the basin and by pumping.

The safe yield of the ground-water reservoir may be less than 5,000

acre-feet and it probably does not exceed 10,000 to 15,000 acre-feet per year.

As of March 1950 the safe yield had not been exceeded because only two wells

were in use.

The waters from wells in the flat lands near the center of the basin may

be considered "permissible to doubtful" or 'Soubtfal to unsuitable11 for irriga-

tion use* and some of the shallow waters near Bouse are "unsuitable11 for irriga-

tion use. The ground waters generally contain enough dissolved mineral* matter

to have a noticeable taste. Most of the samples showed amounts of fluoride

sufficient to causa mottling of tooth enamel in small children.

Table 1. Summary of climatological data, 1909-Uo, Salome, Yuma County. Ariz. (From records of U. S. Vfeather Bureau)

Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Annual

i-.ean max.. temp., °T
i ' - '' ' ' Mean min. temp., °F.

63-U 67.0 73-7 81.9 90.7 L00.9 10U.1 102.0 96.9 86.2 7U.8 6U.8 83.9 33-1 36.3 U0.7 H5-7 52.2 61.9 72.1 71-3 63.1 U9.7 39-5 3U.U ' 50.0

he an temp. , °F.

1*8.2 51-7 57.2 63.8 71-U 81. U 88.0 86.6 80.0 68.0 57.0 U9.U 66.9

extreme max. temp., °F. Extreme min. temp., °F* Mean precipitation, in. Greatest monthly precip., in.

85 91 96 103 111 L18 117 117 111 106

15 18 ' 2U 26 3^ U2 50 50 U2 28

.2993 1.07 .63

.06 .16 1.11 i.»»7 69 .1*8

3.81 5*06 2.2] 2.27 .37 2.25 U.20 9-27 6.16 2.09

9U 16
53 2-97

85 118 16 ^ 1.1U 8.56
1
3.7U '-

Least monthly precip., in.

0
> ' '--!

0 .

00

0

._____t_

0

.08 r ... T 0 0 0

"i

VO

fi?

Table 2. Summary of climatoloeical data, 1918~Uo, Quartzite, Yuma County, Ari2. (Prom records of U. S. Weather Bureau)

1
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. Nay June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Annual

fean max. temp., °F.

65.8 71-1 78.9 87-7 97-0 105-5 109. U 107- U 102.3 89-7 76.0 65.7 88.0

.eaa win. temp., °F. lean temp. , °P.

33-9 38.6 UU.2 52.2 60.U 70.1 78.7 77-4 68.6 53-4 41.0 35-3 54.5
50.0 5^.7 61.5 69.9 78.5 87-7 9^.0 92.U 85.3 71.1* 58.5 50.4 71.2

uctreme mex. temp., °F. extreme min. teiup., °F. iean precipitation, in. Greatest nonthly precip., in.

8U 88 LOO 111 121 122 12U 124 116 108

9 17 25 27 IK> ^3 52 62 . 42 30

' *3
.8U

35 23

.06 .15

.67 1.06

-71

-37

2.72 5.85 1.51 1.28 ^3 1.UO 2.09 5.53 6.16 1..93

97 17
..4o 3-31

84 124 16 9
77 6.04 3-3C

Least monthly precip., in. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 - 0 . Q 0. 0

21

Table 3 Records of wells in northern part of Ranegras Plain area, Tuma County, Aria.

Measuring point J Usually top of casing, top of pump base, or top of well curb. Type of pump and power: T, turbine; C, cylinder; 2, electric motor; G, gasoline;
v, wind; H, hand; 0, diesel.

Well Location Owner Driller no.

T. U IT., R. 15 W, \oj 1 ESiKSjrSSj- sec. 2 -
*p . F4&4Sr& sec. 7
k L BtffSSj- sec. 8
! " m^-HEi sec. 8

E. J. Relf J. Trad Ash
et al.
J. S. Hi ley
do.

5 S1&HE& sec. 8 6 m^St* sec. 9

do. Ora C. Jordan

G. Relf Robinson & Mason
_
Riley and Franks
mm

, 7 HE&KVi sec. 9 ia/ 8 P&3il»4!Wj sec. IS
9 W^H'-^* sec. 18 10 SE^SBi-SEj- sec. 23 11 S2^^^ sec. 28

H. B. Heed
Parry^Bros. Perry, Set tan,
and Granrille
Crowder Cattle Co.

Robinson & Mason
Thompson Bros*
_

T. U ».. H. 16 tf. a/ 12 m^NEi- sec. 1*5
a/ 13 3n&30$ sec. 19 a/ lU StfiNWi sec. 19

SfOLUIS,
Williams Mra. Callie Battles
£. A*
Rathburn

xpiAe_x Roberts
Rex Roberts

T. 5 H., H. ll* V.

15 IJWi: sec. 16 «, «a a/ See table 5 ^or analysisi of vater from tiiia well

Ea^e complet-
ed

Depth of well (feet)

Diam-
eter of well (inches)

19UU r/ 300 19^8 528 1935 r/ U20
_ 1926 r/ 206 1938 r/ 250
r/ 250 19^8 1.005 19^9 1.2H2
..

8
20 i
6 i
6
8
8
6
20
12
6

19^8 r/ 303 r/ 285
1^6 r/ 530
^ ,m

i
6
8 60

22

of water: I, irrigation; S, stock; D, domestic; P, public supply; N, none; RR, railroad.

i
Veil no.

Water level

Depth Bate

below

of

measur- _ measure-

ing point ment

(feet)

Punp Use
and of power Water

Temp. (°3T)

Remarks

1 262.0 2 12U.5C 3 r/116 j *\ 127.70
5 128.25 6 p/135
7. 8 130.66
9 131.9!*
10 158. te
11 .

Nov. 17, 19^8
ITov. 8, 19U8
Hov. 17, 19^8
Hov. 17, 19^3
Jan* 8, 19^5
Hov. 18,
1'9.^8
Bbv. 8, 19^8
May 10, 19>*9
S>v. 22, 19^8

C.B
C,E ITone C,G
C T,E IT^ne
T.E
None C,G

12 211 13 2U^.U
- lU r/200 -: '

2Tov. 17, 19^8
Nov. 18, 19^8
Bbv. IS, 19^8

G,G C,E C,E '

D N D D D D D B
I
N S
D D D

See log

Casing being withdrawn, Nov. 17, 19^-8
Observation well
_

Discharge, approximately 900 82 gallons a minute. Well abandon
See log* '- Discharge, reported by driller,
2,000 gallons a minute with drawdown of 170 feet.' See log.

: -"

--

_"

--

-'

Hay 25, 15 T7.UV 19^8 xy Reported.

H

D

Taps perched water body* Known a Desert Prospect about 1910.
,

23
Table 3. Records of wells in northern part of Ranegraa Plain area, Yuma County, Ariz. Continued

Veil ; no.

Location

T 5 K., a. 15 tr^
, I* Mi- sec. *5
h -^17 SE^S?4 sec. 7
*=/ - 1=8 HBtBW^ sec. 21
K- « HEj-UEj- aec« 30
20 Slis^S^ sec. 32 T. 5 tf.. R. 16 W,
a/ 21 SWjF-?i sec. 9.
1' 22 SS^SBiSE^ sec. 9 23 SIS&SEi aec. 10 T, 6 H., E, 15 ^
21* SBj-ESiHBj sec, 32 T. 6 H., R. 16 Wtt
21 UEj-NEj: sec. 22
aL. 26 HSiHEi sec* 2.6
27 Wi sec* 32 . T. 6 N.. R. 17 V.
28 HE& sec. 12 T. 7 H.. R. 15 V.
29 SEjSEjsEi sec. 9 T. 7 H., R* 17 *A
eZ_ jo. Bf^ sec. 6 31 B^-SW^ sec. 9

Owner
A. T. and
Crowdsr Cattle Co.
_
P. Higgins
Crowd er Cattle Co.
_

Driller

i
I "Date i complet-
ed

Depth of well
(feet)

Bias-
eter of nell (inches)

Ariz. and
Gal. By. Co 1Q11 r/ to
. _ r/ 250 .
Robinson and Mascn IQlfg r/ 600

10
X
6 g
20

_ ^ r/ 1&5

6

1U6 7
_ 16

«*
Chester Johns do.

Thonrpson Iros.
do. -.

_
19^S 878 do. 1.265
r/ 900

2
20 20
16

R. H. Thompson
do.

Rex Roberts

Feb. 19'50

12
6

do*
»

19^6
^^

r/ 1* 112.

6 6

Well'. no*

Water level

Depth Date

below

af

measur- measure-

ing point ment

(feet)

Pump
and Power

TJse of
Water

16' r/2^
17 . 1U6.UO 18 202.17 19 15^.^0
20 119.09

Feb. 1, 1911
Hov. 15, 19^8
Nov. 16, 19^8
Nov. 16, 19^8
Kbv. 8, 19^8

None C,W None None

N S N N

Nov. 15,

21 122.23 19^8

C.VT

Uov. 12,

22 120,^ 19^8

None

Feb. 21,

2} llU.OO 19^6

None

S N N

21* 269'

Feb. 17,

19^9

None

N

25 26
,.2?

June 8, 169.33 19^8
Hov. 16, W*^.. 19^8
Nov. 12, 98.*f6~ 19^8

T,E T,E None

II N

Jan* 9,

28 6U.12 19^5

c,v

S

_29 95

Feb. 26,
1950 c,w

S

Feb. 20,

,, 30 110,56 19^6

C.fc

Nov. 22,

31 110.00 19^8

None

S N

-Temp. <°«

Remarka

See log

Well was test-pumped. Small production
-
--
See log Discharge, approximately 2,300 82 gallons a minute with drawdown of 2«5 feet Probably drilled for irrigation but used only for stock
- ..
-
7S

25

Table J. Hecc-rds of wells in northern part of Banegras Plain area, Tuna County Aris. Continued

Well Location no*
T. 7 F.. H. 17 Y. 32 Sec, 10 ft/ J3 S^BBjswJ sec. 15 a/ J Si^m^SWl sec. 15 35 SEJSH&S2& sec. 15 a/ 36 SBj-NE^-mi- sec* 22 T7 SEj-KEj-KEj sec. 22 32 WiKBj sec. 22 39 S3^N^I^- sec. 22
Uo SEj-BTiSEj- sec. 22 in. HBj-StfJ sec, 23
U2 KEj-SWj sec. 23 U3j HBj'HEi'SWi sec. 23
. ifl* IS^HBiSWi sec. 23 l/ *5 SW&HE£sw£ sec* 23
«
H6 K0jF4s«* sec, 23
y ^7]SE^HWiSWi sec. 23 ug. m&M£svi> sec. 23
, ^? NV^m^SW^ sec. 23
50 Wfifflaiswi- sec. 23 j 51!94flViSl4 sec* 23 ± 52 SEjNViswi sec. 23

Owner -

Driller

Date complet-
ed

Depth of well (feet)

Diaffl-
eter of veil { inches)

1*3

_
C. A. N-artin C. Whiteley

1905
. Mar. G. Williams igl*9

1*7.7! 55-5 125 Uty

6 6 g **S

do.

19*tf r/ 90

6_

Bellows

. r/ 3* ' 72

C. Whiteley

r/ 90 . 6

fcrs. Bouse A« T. and
S. Js* A A.

. 33.5i Ariz. and Cal. Hy. Co 1911 r/ 690 i

6 13

C. Milton

1916 r/ 73 ! 6

M. lopez

r/ *5 '. 6

J. C. Towns end
R. Montijo T. G. Bolieu
do. S* IT* Peter son A. 0. Lingle

M> ! !*S

Sutton

19^6 r/ 92

6

i

B. Montljo 191*6 r/ 1*2 i 1»*

r/ 60 ! *8

_ . r/ 77

6

Re "bison Her Roberts

igiig r/ 90 '
1<&S S2.5

6
6

State Elgwey Department

w*

37.5 . 6

26

Water level

Depth

Date

Vfell "below

of

no. measur- measure-

ing. Doint ment

(feet)

Pump and
Dower

Use
of water

Temp <°«

Remarks

Nov. 5,

32 S5.70 19Ug

Wov. 2,

V 32.97 l*g Nov. 2,

* ^7.96 19US

Kar. 31

35 38-17 19^9

36

^iao

Nov. 3, 19^8

37"

b. ^

Jan.
38 23.62 191*5

Nov. 2,

39 36.00 19^ NOV. 3,
Uo 31.68 i9UB

Ul */ 55 i$ll

None N C,H N C.H S Z 13
c,w S
C.H D G 'I " T.E D,5 C,G N C.G HH

*
72-5 Irrigates am>roximately 10 acres.
-

U2 ,

C.G D

_' i . .

Nov. 3,
*3 Ul.20 19Ug C,G D

Jan. 9,
UU 56.S5 19^

Nov. 15,
*5 35.^9 19^ C,S D 77

U6

Nov. 3,
39.00 19^8 None N.

Jan. 9,
*7 U2.19 19*& c,w D

NOV. 3,
Us Uo.6U 19^g T.E D

U9

Nov. 2,
^3-25 19^8 None D

Not yet in use.

Nov. 2,

50

Uo.gU 19^8

None H

An.

51

Nov. 2,
35-5S 19^8 None N

52

Nov. 3,
37.50 19^8

G

P

-

-

_________L

L

27 ,
Table 3, Record* of wells In northern part of Ranegraa Plain area, Txuna Co-unty, Ariz. Continued

i

i uell
no.

Location

ii T. 7 N.. R. 17 V^

53 SV&SEirSVfJ- sec. 23

Owner W. Brodie

Bate Driller ' com-
pleted

Depth
of well :
(feet)

Dian-
eter of well ( inches)

G. Williams 1*9 r/ &

6

a/ 5U SWiNWiHEj sec. 26 R. Berkeley

1933 52 Ug

55 IJIE-1-^!!^- sec. 26 ?. Simp son

1 56 F'&^'frWi sec. 26 J. C. Tovnsend -
57 swfcswiiwi sec. 26 do.

58 SliSEiSli sec. 26 J. K. Jones

_

59 KB4 sec. ^ 60 F^WtlEi sec. 35

J. K. Jones

.
-

19H7 r/ 55 r/ 37
19^7 r/ 92 r/ 70
._ 192^

6 -
8
6 . Ug

61 ff-^StfiSBi sec. 35 J, L. Zello T, g H., R. 17 W*

Sution
.:- .

r/ 110

6

62 KEi sec. ^ .

^

r ^

See table 5 for analysis of water from this well.

«M

m

6

28

Water level

Depth, Date

"below

of Pump

Well measur- measure- and

no* ing point ment power

(feet)

53 35.55 5^ 38.18 55 r/ 35 56 3^.02 57 3^.28 58 59 59-90 60 31.60
61 r/ 32

Apr. 21, 19^9
Nov. 15, 19^8
Nov. 15, 19^8
Nov. 4, 19^8
Nov. 4, 19^8
Nov. 4,
19^8 Nov. 4,
19^8
Jan. 9, 19^5
Nov. 4, 19^8

None H
C,H «
None 0,H
c,w
C,V T,E

Use of
Water
N D D D.S N D S D,S D,I

Temp. (°«

Remarks

Not' yet in use.
7^ 9m
_
tm
. Not -ye* ia use.
.. ._
> ^^
. Small plot under cultivation

Nov. 5,
62 56.30 19^8
r/ Reported

None

N

Table U-. Logs of wells in northern part of Ranegras Plain area,. Yuma County, Ari

Thickness Depth

(feet) (feet)

Driller's log of well 2

J. Fred Ash, et al, ovmer

StfjBl&HWi sec. 7, T. U U.'t R. 15 W.

Soil ---------' b

^

Caliche ------Gravel ----^---

37 3 '. 10

Sand and clay - - - - 180 190 Clay --------- 225 ^15

Clay, cemented sand and

gravel - - - -'.- - - 113 \ 528

TOTAL DEPTH -----

' 528

Driller's log of veil 8

Perry Bros., owners
aec. IS, T. U H.. R. 15 w. Gravel -------- 170 170

Clay and gravel - - - 30 200

590 790

Shale and clay - - - - Uo 830

Hock and gravel - - - 15 845

Gravel and shale - - - 30 875

Gravel apd rock - - - 107 982

3b sample ------

7 989

Sock and gravel - - - 16 1,005

TOTAL DEPTH

1.005

Driller 1 s log of well 9

Perry, Setton, and Granville, owners

F-'fF/JiswJ- sec. 18, T. H H., R. 15

Sand, clay, and boulders 83 83

Clay, caliche, and

shells ------- lU9 232

Clay, streaks of sand ; 63 295

Sand, gravel, streaks ;

of clay -------- Uo 335 Clay» streaks of sand 230 565

Clay, streaks of

cemented gravel - - - 66 631

Clay vith sand and

gravel streaks - - - 68 699

Clay --------- 23 722

Black sticky shale - -

6 728

Red shale and gravel - 70 798

Sand, streaks red shale ^5

Hard shale ------ 36 879

Cemented gravel, sand

and shells ----- 18 897

Conglomerated sand and

pea-rock gravel - - - 5^ 951

Sand and gravel - - - 200

Thickness Depth

(feet) (feet)

Driller 1 s log of well 9 -Con, t

Perry, Setton, and Granville, owners

NVfjNWiSWj sec. 18, T. U- H., R, 15 W.

Black swamp mud ----- 10 |

Conglomerate ------ 19 1,180

Gravel and sand, lime shells 20 1,200

Conglomerate and bentonite

chalk --------- 22 1,222

TOTAL DEPTH -------

1,222

Driller 1 s log of well 16

A. T. & S. P. R. R., ovmer

UBj sec. 5, T. 5 3ff., R. 15 V,

Cement, gravel, some clay

streaks -------- 265

Coarse gravel ------

65

Cement gravel ------

13

TOTAL DSPTH -------

265

Drillers log of vrell 25

Chester Johns, ovmer

HEjUEj-sec. 22, T. 6 IT., R. l6 W,

Sand, silt, and caliche

50

Silt and clay ------

60

Sand and gravel v/ith

streaks of clay - - - - 316

Sand and gravel - - - - -

S^nd and clay ------

25

Sand ----------

55

Clay, some with sand streaks 50

Sand ----------

30

Clay ---------- 10

Sand ---------- 23

Sand and gravel - - - - - 22

Sand and gravel, streaks

of hard red shale - - - M-6

Sand and gravel, thin

streaks of clay - - - - ^3

Clay with streaks of

sand ---------- 2H

TOTAL DEPTH -------

550
575 630
680
710 720 7*3 765
811
87 S 878

Driller 1 s log of well 26 Chester Johns, owner
&EBi sec. 26, T. 6 IT., R. 16 W, Sand and caliche - - - - 67 Clay and silt ------ 66 Streaks of clay with sand and graval - - - - 229 Sand and gravel ----- 13!

67 127 356

30
Table U. Logs of wella in northern part of Ranegraa Plain area Continued

Thickness Depth

Thickness

(feet) (feet)

(feet)

Drillers log of well 26 - Con.

Driller's log of well 41

Chester Johns, owner

A. T. & S. F. R. R«, ovrner

ftSrNEj- sec.. 26, T. 6. N., H. 16 *'S33 EE^SWi sec. 23, T. 7 Htl R, 17 W.

Sand and clay - - - - - lU6

Sand, clay, and gravel - - 178

Sand --------- 79 712 Cemented gravel with

Sand --------- 9U
Hard red shale - - - - 121 Bed clay and sand streaks 269
ITOT'&T. TMj'UT'Lf

879
1,000 1,269 1,269

Reddish conglomerate - - Grayish traprock with
TOTAL DEPTH - « - -

20 100

Depth (feet)
330 350 ^50 690 6qo

lable 5» Analyses of water samples from typical wells in northern part of the Ranegras Plain area, Yuma County, Ariz. * Analyzed by Quality of Water branch. Geological Survey (Parts per million except specific conductance and percent sodium)

Well Date of no. collection

Specific Cal- Mag- Sodium Bicar-

conduct- cium ne- and bonate

ance/(KxlO°

(Ca) sium potassium (HC0 3 ) (Mg) (NafK)

at 25° C.)

(micromhos

sq. cm.)

1 Nov. 17,191*8
3 Nov. 17
8 Mar. 8,191*9 12 Nov. 17, 191*8
a Nov. 18, Nov. 18, 18 Feb. 22,191*6 21 Feb. 23,
26 Mar. 31,191*9 30 Feb. 20.19U6
33 Nov. 15,191*8 3U ilov. 15,
Feb. 22,19U6
f*5 Nov. 15.19U8
ITJ Feb. 22,191*6
sU Nov. 15,191*8

1,560 2,290 1,680
77*
81*5 bib
i,Uoo
1.390
1,730
1,020 72U
1,1*20
5,630
1,1*60
1,920 2.560

26 13
203 1.3 181 6.3 12 1.1*

127 , 15

l^ 3

--

**5 8.6

50 9.2
52 6.8 88 9-9
-

315*12* 116

68
17 23

2U 8.3

281 333 191 150
62 109 216
301*
l6U 70
888 181
279
5U3

ll*6 26 121
55
278
161* S7
192 176 1*59 75
126
193 172 358

Sul- Chlo- Fluo- NL-
fate ride ride trate
(so^) (Cl) (F) (NO,^)

198 265
900 175 553 138 123 108
226 27 17
208 224 206
28U 2UO 189 118
13 6
85
886 1,^30
287 86 360 325
603 235

5-5 19
6-5 16 U.i 16 8.9 16
3 l^ 3 -1.7 11
5->* 22 _ 9-U 5.6 .5
U.U 20 U.2 5.6 3.8 8.U 7-7 .7

Dissolved solids

Total Per-
hard- . cent ness soas CaCC dium
3

929 1,660 1,190
U62
601 390
758
1.050 626 U70 -
3,700 762
1,200 1,630

118
512
U78 36
3*3 95
1U8
163 158 260 -
l.lUO 200 38U 9U

8U
R^7 91
29 71
76
80 70
37
63 66 61 93

PLATE 3

A. Tuff exposed on the erst slope of Pyramid Peek. The "" dark stratum is red fine-grained, ecuigranular tuff
of Cretaceous and Tertiary age.

W*-T»-i*»»-« *

'r ' '
X',:«= : /: !^:.V'

E. Looking west at Jbur Peaks. The irounteln is "" a volcanic neck of Cretaceous and Tertiary age*

PLATE U
A. Caliche-cemented fpngloir.erate formed on a hill of "" Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks. The outcrop
is 2 miles northeast of Bouse, on the west side of the Bouse Hills.
B. looking northepst at an outcrop of caliche-cemented fanglomerate on the slope of a hill composed of Cretaceous and Tertiary volcanic rocks, about U miles east of Bouse.

PLATE L MAP OF NORTHERN PART OF RANEGRAS PLAIN AREA YUMA COUNTY, ARIZ.
SHOWINGGEOLOGT, LOCATION OF WELLS,AND DEPTH TO WATER
V«C KR-LSftW Of BOOSi. CTC TACEOUSPI Sc. . »f.NTiRT«)CK5 r^T »«Y VOLC»HIC*NO SCO"»EXT»9T "OCHI 2«l £5MC Of 80USE A»0 9»5ALTIC ROCKS It.. BTMCflNPlRTOf PLOMOS4 KOJKTAINS.
IM TtRnt»T(?| COWSCONtajT TCR'BCAMINC OHLT M CUCTUHt ZONES
OCPTM TO WSTER.IN FEET.FES CONTACT NOT ACCURATELY MJ3CATED
sCnSTRIKE AND QIP FAULT SHOtlNS CUP PBCBASLE FAJLT

"><? '> 'K'^«^?!)sNO'"'I'! S*0)«<E

