WATER-RESOURCES ACTIVITIES OF THE U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY IN KANSAS FISCAL YEARS 1983 AND 1984 Compiled by L. J. Combs U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY Open-File Report 85-178
Lawrence, Kansas 1985

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR DONALD PAUL MODEL, Secretary GEOLOGICAL SURVEY Dallas L. Peck, Director

Write or telephone for additional information on:

THE WATER RESOURCES DIVISION
Philip Cohen Chief Hydrologist U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Division 409 National Center Reston, Virginia 22092 Telephone: (703) 860-6921

WATER IN THE GREAT PLAINS
Alfred Clebsch, Jr. Regional Hydrologist Central Region U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Division Box 25046, Mail Stop 406 Denver Federal Center Lakewood, Colorado 80225 Telephone: (303) 234-3611

WATER IN KANSAS
0. S. Rosenshein
District Chief U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Division 1950 Constant Avenue - Campus West University of Kansas Lawrence, Kansas 66046 Telephone: (913) 864-4321

11

CONTENTS Page
Abstract- ------------------------------- 1 Introduction- ----------------------------- 1 Program funding and cooperation -------------------- 3 Publications- ----------------------------- 3 Data-collection programs- ----------------------- 6
Surface-water data program (KS-001)- --------------- 7 Ground-water data program (KS-002) ----------------13 Water-quality data program (KS-003)- ---------------16 Sediment-data program (KS-004) ------------------17 National Atomspheric Deposition Program and Trends Network
Stations (KS 005)- -----------------------22
Automated water-use data bases (KS-007)- -------------23 Hydrologic-data base, southwestern Kansas GWMD # 3 (KS-086)- - - - 24 Hydrologic-data base, western Kansas GWMD #1 (KS-117)- ------ 25 Hydrologic investigations -----------------------26 Areal or local investigations ------------------26
Effects of urbanization on flood runoff, Wichita (KS-013) - - 26 Sandstone aquifers, southwest Kansas (KS-079) --------27 Kansas-Nebraska Blue River Compact (KS-084) ---------28 Geohydrology of Arkansas River valley in southwest Kansas
(KS-088) -------------------------29
Glacial deposits in northeast Kansas (KS-091) --------30 "Equus beds" aquifer, central Kansas (KS-092) --------31 Quality of water from urban runoff, Topeka (KS-096) ----- 32 Hydrologic consequences of strip mining, Miami, Linn, and
Bourbon Counties (KS-099)- ----------------33
iii

CONTENTS Continued

Hydro!ogic investigations Continued Area! or location Investigations Continued

Page

Conjunctive-use models for North and South Fork Solomon Rivers, north-central Kansas (KS-100)- ----------34

Water resources of Ford County (KS-106) -----------35
Effects of ground-water withdrawals on water levels and streamflow in the Arkansas River near Garden City (KS-107) -------------------------36

Geohydrology and water quality of deep-aquifer systems, western Kansas (KS-109) -----------------37

Geohydrology of Wellington Formation in Salina area (KS-110)- 38 Stream gains and losses, upper Neosho River valley (KS-115) - 39 Quality of water in lead-zinc mined areas, southeast
Kansas (KS-119) ---------------------40

Hydrology of Coal Area 40, Western Interior Coal Province (KS-121)- --------------------41

Natural ground-water recharge dynamics in the Kansas plains (KS-122) ---------------------42

Effects of irrigation return flow on; water quality of streams, central and western Kansas (KS-125) -----------43

Lower Cretaceous sandstone aquifers, southwest Kansas (KS-127) ------------------------- 44

Natural ground-water recharge, Harvey v.o^n;y (KS-128) - - - - 45

Hydrology of Coal Area 39, Western Interior Coal Province (KS-129)- --------------------46

Estimating stream-aquifer interactions in coal areas of eastern Kansas (KS-131)- ------------------ 47

Availability of natural and regulated streamflows during droughts, lower Neosho River (KS-133)- ----------- 48

Transit loss, travel times, and related hydraulic and hydro!ogic characteristics of selected stream-aquifer systems (KS-134)- 49

Hydrology and water quality of Sedgwick County (KS-136)- - - - 50

IV

CONTENTS Continued Hydrologic investigations Continued

Page

Statewide or regional investigations --------------- 51

Flood hydrology and hydraulics for transportation application (KS-010) ------------------------- 51

Streamflow characteristics (KS-011) ------------- 52

Evaluation of Ground-Water-Quality Monitoring Network (KS-077) ------------------------- 53

Potential for liquid-waste injection (KS-078) -------- 54

Estimating ground-water withdrawals, western Kansas (KS-090)- 55 Aquifer-test evaluation (KS-093)- -------------- 56

High Plains regional aquifer-system analysis (KS-094) - - - - 57

Central Midwest regional aquifer-system analysis (KS-111) - - 59

Flood volume in small basins, western Kansas (KS-113) - - - - 60

High-flow volume-frequency relations (KS-116) -------- 61

Kansas surface-water network evaluation (KS-130)- ------ 62

Effects of multipurpose use on water quality of public water-supply lakes (KS-132) ---------------- 63

Water quality in the High Plains aquifer (KS-135) ------ 64

Geohydrologic evaluation of hazardous-waste sites in selected areas (KS-138) ------------------ 65

Research projects ------------------------ 66

Distributed information systems (KS-102)- ---------- 66

Automatic Data Recorder Applications (KS-124) -------- 66

Regional synthesis of the hydrogeology of the United States (KS-137) ---------------------- 67

List of reports approved for publication or release during
1983 and 1984- ------------------------- 68

Hydrologic-data stations in Kansas, 1984 water year- ------- 71

ILLUSTRATIONS

Figure

Page

1. Map showing location of offices of the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas- -------------------------- 2

2. Diagram showing distribution of funding for the water-resources program of the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas, fiscal years 1983 and 1984- --------------------- 4

3. Map showing availability of flood-prone area maps -------- 5

4. Map showing location of complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year ------------------ 8

5. Map showing location of partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year ------------------ 10

6. Map showing location of recording rainfall stations, 1984 water year -------------------------- 12

7. Map showing location of observation wells, 1984 water year- - - - 14 8. Map showing location of surface-water-quality gaging
stations, 1984 water year ------------------ 18

9. Map showing location of ground-water-quality sampling sites, 1984 water year ----------------------- 20
10. Diagram showing well-numbering system -------------- 73

TABLES

Table

Page

1. Complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year- - 74

2. Partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year - - 79

3. Precipitation-record gaging stations, 1984 water year ------ 84

4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year ------ 85

5. Surface-water-quality stations, 1984 water year --------- 92

6. Ground-water-quality observation wells, 1984 water year ----- 94

VI

WATER-RESOURCES ACTIVITIES OF THE U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
IN KANSAS FISCAL YEARS 1983 AND 1984
Compiled by
L. J. Combs
ABSTRACT
The principal mission of the U.S. Geological Survey, Water Resources Division, in Kansas is to investigate the occurrence, quantity, quality, distribution, and movement of surface and ground waters throughout the State. Primary activities include the systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of hydrologic data, evaluation of water demands, and water-resources research. Hydrologic investigations are conducted through four basic types of projects: (1) data-collection programs, (2) local or areal investigations, (3) statewide or regional investigations, and (4) research projects. These projects are funded through cooperative agreements with State and local agencies, transfer of funds from other Federal agencies, and direct Federal funds.
Fifty water-related projects were ongoing during fiscal years 1983 and 1984 in Kansas. This report describes for each of these waterresources activities the problem that initiated the study, the objectives of the project, and the approach designed to achieve these objectives. Information on data-collection stations in Kansas is presented in maps and tables. A list of the 40 reports approved for publication by the U.S. Geological Survey, its cooperators, or technical and scientific organizations during 1983 and 1984 is provided.
INTRODUCTION
The Organic Act of March 3, 1879, established the U.S. Geological Survey as a separate Bureau of the Department of the Interior. The Survey's principal mission became (1) the classification and survey of public lands, (2) the examination of the geologic structure and the mineral resources of the national domain, and (3) the determination of the water resources of the United States. Seven years later, in 1886, the first water-resources investigation by the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas was completed by A. C. Peale. A cooperative program with the Kansas State Board of Irrigation and Surveys instituted the first streamgaging stations in western Kansas during 1895. The gaging program was extended to eastern Kansas in 1899.

From these early beginnings, the U.S. Geological Survey has expanded its work in Kansas to meet the growing demand for scientific data by Federal, State, and local agencies for use in the management of one of the State's most precious resources water. The Kansas District, with headquarters in Lawrence and a subdistrict office in Garden City (fig. 1), investigates the occurrence, quantity, quality, distribution, and movement of surface and ground waters. Its activities include the systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; the investigation of water demand for public supply, industrial, domestic, and agricultural purposes; and the research and development of new techniques to improve the scientific basis of data collection and investigative principles.
Hydrologic-data collection and analyses and investigative studies are conducted at project offices in Lawrence and Garden City. Hydrologic data management, the district sediment laboratory, computer applications, and the scientific reports section are centered at the District office in Lawrence. The fiscal year for Federal government operations extends from October 1 of each year to September 30 of the following year. In publications of the U.S. Geological Survey, this time period is also known as a water year.

102«

101*

NEBRASKA 99* 98*

Lawrence { 5

ddiissttrrict -

* office I co

"<?\**,o

I' 25

OKLAHOMA

"-1 L 0 26 50 MILES
0 25 50 KILOMETERS

Figure 1. Location of offices of the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas.

PROGRAM FUNDING AND COOPERATION
Moneys for program operation of the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas come from joint-funding agreements with State and local agencies, transfer of funds from other Federal agencies, and direct Federal allotments to the U.S. Geological Survey. Distribution of funding for program operation in FY83-84 is illustrated in figure 2. Those agencies cooperating with the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas during the 1983 and 1984 fiscal years were:
State and local agencies
Kansas Geological Survey Kansas Water Office Kansas State Board of Agriculture, Division of Water Resources Kansas Department of Health and Environment City of Hays City of Wichita Western Kansas Groundwater Management District No. 1 Southwest Kansas Groundwater Management District No. 3 Kansas-Oklahoma Arkansas River Commission Arkansas River Compact Administration Harvey County
Federal agencies
U.S. Department of Army, Corps of Engineers U.S. Bureau of Reclamation

PUBLICATIONS

Water-resources data and the results of hydrologic investigations in Kansas are published or released either by the U.S. Geological Survey, by cooperating agencies, or by journals of technical and scientific organiza-
tions. Requests for such information and for publications resulting from past or present investigations of the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas
should be addressed to one of the following:

District Chief
U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Division 1950 Constant Avenue - Campus West Lawrence, Kansas 66046 Phone: 913-864-4321

Subdistrict Chief
U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Division 206 Fulton Terrace Garden City, Kansas 67846 Phone: 316-275-4123

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY SUMMARY OF KANSAS DISTRICT PROGRAM
Federal Fiscal Year 1983

Cooperative Program (Federal Matching) 32.1 percent

Federal Program 17.9 percent

Other State & Local Agencies 10.0 percent
KSuanrvseays Geological -^/ 6.9 percent
Kansas State Board of Agriculture 3.2 percent

Other Federal Agencies 18.0 percent
t_ Kansas Water Office 12.0 percent

Federal Fiscal Year 1984

Cooperaifcs n^ogram (federal Matching) 316 peewit

Other State & Local Aosnciss 112 percent
Kansas Survey 3*3 percent
Kansas State Buutd of Agricuttuni 4.1 percent
Figure 2. Distribution of funding for the water-resources program of the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas, fiscal years 1983 and
1984.

The U.S. Geological Survey also conducts an extensive topographic mapping program in Kansas from its regional office in Roll a, Missouri. Standard quadrangle maps published in the 7 1/2- and 15-minute series provide coverage for the entire State. To obtain an index to these topographic quadrangles or to purchase the maps, contact:
Kansas Geological Survey Publications Sales, 4th Floor 1930 Constant Avenue - Campus West Lawrence, Kansas 66046
For additional information on the U.S. Geological Survey's mapping program in Kansas, write to:
Mid-Continent National Cartographic Information Center U.S. Geological Survey 1400 Independence Road Rolla, Missouri 65401
Studies in Kansas to investigate the frequency and extent of flooding have resulted in delineation of the 100-year flood boundary on selected topographic quadrangle maps (fig. 3). These maps are available from the Kansas District office in Lawrence.

102*

101*

NEBRASKA 99* oa«

1'
U ._._1v- -_i»v 1i ^%K-:-:-.m-:-:-:-a:-:*i.I

,,.J- .-J. -L.

i

i

r r1 i-

97* 96* 95*

-.. .--, . ^r- ' :

:

Ii, !i /\

' Ir -ri Ar.i

ff5?W^ .

I

.-i.-^ 1_.

EXPLANATION
AREA COVERED BY FLOOD-PRONE AREA MAPS

I tji 25 50 KILOMETERS

Figure 3. Availability of flood-prone area maps,

DATA-COLLECTION PROGRAMS
Throughout its long history of service, one mission of the U.S. Geological Survey, Water Resources Division, has been the comprehensive and systematic collection of hydro!ogic data and the timely release of such data for public use. To help provide this service, a network of hydrologic-data stations is maintained throughout Kansas to obtain records of (1) stage, discharge, chemical quality, and sediment yield of streams; (2) stage, content, and chemical quality of lakes and reservoirs; (3) precipitation; and (4) water levels and chemical quality of ground water.
Hydrologic data collected in Kansas as part of the water-resourcesdata network are published annually in a comprehensive report entitled "Water-Resources Data for Kansas, Water Year 19 ". Each water-data report carries an identification number consisting of the two-letter state abbreviation, the last two digits of the water year, and the volume number. For example, the report for the 1983 water year is identified as "U.S. Geological Survey Water-Data Report KS-83-1. Reports for each water year are released the following calendar year. Water-data reports are available from the U.S. Geological Survey office in Lawrence, Kansas, or from the National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield Virginia 22161.
Hydrologic data also are stored in both current and historical computer files in the U.S. Geological Survey's National Water-Data Storage and Retrieval System (WATSTORE). The data are available for water planning and management in machine-readable form, computer-printed tables or graphs, statistical analyses, and digital plots. Local assistance in the acquisition of computer services is available from the Kansas District office in Lawrence.

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Surface-water data program PROJECT NUMBER: KS-001 COOPERATING AGENCY: Multi-agency PROJECT CHIEF: C. 0. Geiger
Problem Surface-water information is needed for purposes of surveillance, planning, design, hazard warning, operation, and management in such water-related fields as water supply, hydroelectric power, flood control, irrigation, floodplain management, and water-resources development. To provide this information, an appropriate and comprehensive data base is necessary.
Objectives Collect surface-water data sufficient to satisfy needs for current-purpose uses, such as (1) assessment of water resources, (2) operation of reservoirs or industries, (3) forecasting, (4) pollution controls and disposal of wastes, (5) discharge data to accompany waterquality measurements, (6) compact and legal requirements, and (7) research or special studies.
Collect data necessary for analytical studies to define, for any location, the statistical properties of, and trends in, the occurrence of water in streams, lakes, and reservoirs for use in planning and design.
Approach -- A network of gaging stations (figs. 4, 5, 6 and tables 1, 2, and 3 at the end of this report) is maintained to provide surface-water data for management and operation, for determination of long-term trends, and for research and special studies. Data are collected on stage and discharge of streams or canals, on stage, surface area, content of lakes and reservoirs, and on precipitation. The network of stations is revised periodically to ensure the collection of meaningful and worthwhile data.

172000

EXPLANATION Drainage basins

Complete-record stations and number

6 Missouri River basin

Note: numbers shown are abbreviated versions of the complete numbers given in text

y Arkansas River basin

Basin boundary

£MSiM)^

r T !!!:irwSS-3Wff.ff^^iY*"

^tl? X*HAWlillN4/«»<>»»» \! |«S»Sr>>

182420 ^ 914000
L eOF«V\ f MWtMOII

1515004^ -^j XI* 148500

Figure 4. Location of complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year.

L' __ _

[_ - - ~ -."~Sl_

' ^~"~ ) '

*» AAA '"- / ' « !»«*'"

~^ 157400.-/ s

155909JT

, 156600, V^1se70p ^^

~[

r-^-^\

' '\

N

1677oV

O^'l'-,r~~~_^~\~~ "" ^l /,,*,,^/,;

_ __}_ ^ ___ _

tf~x / ^

^^ -J^__-ia,_./^ ___ _ _

141600 {

*"TO".

STEVENS

, ""
r _j._

,

"^

SEWARO

x

N ,.,.., " ;'>

. + ^">v_^157»00\|

i " COMANCNE

i

H

"-x^ H^ '^" r^.

umi
x ''-

' ..HA^Rl v

I T "i " -
wr nr \tf ir

1
II

EXPLANATION 9ft1ta3?/0n0n^i Crest-stage station and number i144iCK1i3«On Ai Low-flow station and number
Note: numbers shown are abbreviated versions

.D,,rainage. «b. asins^ , I* Missouri River basin I Arkansas River basin
_

of the complete numbers given in text

Basin boundary

10

02040
,'184800
i vi i j
lAlRtA {/l/CHEiW«E
Figure 5. Location of partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year. 11

102° -^-1. _

101*

100°

99

98" _J

97

96 rr 9j5*- 40 '

j CHCVENNE

RAWLINSg^jjQ FoECATUR

40RTON

I PHILLIPS

! 844e! 84668

-.-.-._._u._._._.h'-

T

I SHERMAN

I THOMAS - 476 ' >HEfUDAN

» 8479j

i

i. _._._!,

.

[ROOKS

! !.,_._._._._.
MiTCHELL

!^u;;,c""!^SmN^TON I MARSHALL

j NEM.HA

J BROWN

I "*-'*'A

i !i

i

'

!*

OONIPHAN

! . nI CLOUD

Ii,

ij. ^ _ _ !L _aIletififeVeeij,i*^,^8011 7

I '^ -'^'^^^ S iffSJiJ _._.T.:i^

i i i i !«f«R80NTiSrv

8447.

IOTTAWA

_ -"-

_ . ^__ . _ _ . -u. r

j

WALLACE

..- ._._._. T .i_.«._._.

! I OGAM

11 BOVE

196686 ! 8Q60P*
ii

.._._.L_._._._. -r _._. _

! ELLIS
i

!
!

1 LINCOLN

§ _._._. |_____,._.J

[SALINE

^

H..../--H

0700

(cREELEYfT IW.CHITA "TVcOtif""

i IVH * !| 1386h«a66! 1388! 1414! 1416

.L-._ .__. __.L_._ ._ ._!._. _. _.. i _._ _ _

^AVc.^

«ARMV iFlNNEt

! HOOOWAM

1380 j oaoq!

STANTON
!1661 i uw

j-._._._.^._._._.L__._._^«OE

I NORTON

* STEVENS

J SEWARO

'

!

1222200!

J

CLARK

ELLSWORTH

J RUSH

_.______I
BARTON
L,

I
^
H MePHERSON

I MARION

LVON

L.-J

I! rCuH*A«S>E

I

j
i

PFRANKUN

!: PAWNEE

[STAFFORD U .-.i r ~~

! COFFEV
LJ

ANOCRtON LINN

i . .m_J

I EOWAROS

!

MATT

; KIOWA

MENO
IKINBMAN

' HARVEY I

i__._;_._._._!

IBJUE*

\**uOREENWOOO

! WOOOSON

p.EOOw.c^|Og
T -J 3000 A14(43 20

___I W_IL_SO_N .._. H

,! NEOSHO

BOURBON

38

( CRAWrOUD t

! H HI

! I

VJ1.44i4453.246.._._._jI ELK

,

.

I CO-LEY

|

L._._._S_._._. '

COMANCHC

1 BARBER

'
FHARPER
I

1144442429O4 14(*4*2**2*0*

|'

-IiMONTOOMERt; LABETTE I-I C'HEROKEE II

! r.uuiT&uOUA ! [ "

I

j

1*1

!

i i .iI .__J_T___._.L__..__ 11__ __ ' ! _ "1

16 30

60 MILES

1571

EXPLANATION RECORDING RAINFALL STATION AND NUMBER

30 60 KILOMETERS

Figure 6. Location of recording rainfall stations, 1984 water year.

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Ground-water data program PROJECT NUMBER: KS-002 COOPERATING AGENCY: Multi-agency PROJECT CHIEF: C. 0. Geiger
Problem Long-term water-level records are needed (1) to evaluate the effects of climatic variations on the recharge to and discharge from the ground-water systems in Kansas, (2) to provide a data base from which to measure the effects of development, (3) to assist in the prediction of future supplies, and (4) to provide data for management of the resource.
Objectives Collect water-level data sufficient to provide a minimum long-term data base so that the general response of the hydrologic system to natural climatic variations and induced stresses is known and so that potential problems can be defined early enough to allow proper planning and management.
Provide a data base against which the short-term records acquired in areal studies can be analyzed. This analysis must (1) provide an assessment of the ground-water resources, (2) allow predictions of future conditions, (3) detect and define pollution and supply problems, and (4) provide the data base necessary for management of the resource.
Approach -- A network of observation wells (fig. 7 and table 4 at the end of this report) is measured to provide a data base for monitoring the general response of ground-water systems to natural climatic variations and to stresses of pumpage. A long-term record of water-level measurements, in conjunction with a description of the hydrological system, provides data for proper planning and management, and for scientific investigations.
13

CMfYENNE

' olb<H»nd SHAMAN

-

I ^ WALLACP

«

! - -*-

I.

"~*

THDMA% |

T+
.V

HAMILTON

KEARNY

* >*.

Li -__._J
* SJAfFDRO

......." * */* *"* » * * *

' » i'
-.^-^?_:_._._J
:

'ir±

t SEWARO

MEADE *

..,'i

»iun

*

UMEK

EXPLANATION
.2
Observation well Number indicates more than one well at this site

14

-.-.
REPUBLIC

-[-T~

WASHINGTON

MAMHAU

;

_
«« »«*

X_,
OONIPNAN

, CLAY

> RUEV \ i

POTTAWATOMIE

JACKSON

-

JEFFERSON

X,

'X LEAVENWORTN >

f*1^-' 4 '

SHAWNEE

~ ~_ ~_ ~ Z;"iiciSior ^ TIMV ~~"~ """"*"" "TOPWA '

VOOmTT"E*
K/ltsftS
v' ** C ' TV

WABAUNSEE

_

LAWRENCE

J,

7~ "

~ ^ __,

------

^^

SAUNA

f

'

__ __ ^^

""I"

,

' ,

j~ '

" '~ " ~ "

MORRIS

! ,

OSAGE

* McPHERSON

I

'- - ,

, ynl( l* OW

_» .
Otiawi FRANKLIN

JOHNSON MIAMI

.*

^f WICHITA _ -. - ^

SEOGWICK

'

*--

.

BUTLER

GREENWOOD

WOOOSON

'
___ . __ _. _ _ __ WILSON

* ALUN NEDSHO

BOURB°N ,

CHAUTAUQUA .

MONTGOMERY

LABETTE

CHEROKEE

Figure 7. Location of observation wells, 1984 water year, 15

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Water-quality data program PROJECT NUMBER: KS-003 COOPERATING AGENCY: Multi-agency PROJECT CHIEF: C. 0. Geiger
Problem ~ Water-resources planning and water-quality assessment require a national data base of relatively standardized information. For intelligent planning and realistic assessment of the water resource, the chemical and physical quality of the rivers, streams, lakes, and reservoirs, as well as major ground-water aquifer systems, must be defined and monitored.
Objectives To provide a national bank of water-quality data for State, local, or Federal planning and action programs, and to provide data for the Federal management of interstate waters. Primary objectives of the network are to depict areal variability of streamflow and water-quality conditions nationwide on a year-by-year basis and to detect and assess long-term changes in streamflow and water quality.
Approach Surface-water-quality stations (fig. 8 and table 5 at the end of this report) are maintained in Kansas to monitor long-term and short-term trends related to changes in streamflow, reservoir operation, and local or regional pollution. In addition, a network for collection of surface-water-quality data, identified as the National Stream-Quality Accounting Network (NASQAN), is designed by the U.S. Geological Survey to meet many of the information demands of agencies or groups involved in national or regional water-quality planning and management. Water samples are collected at a few regular surface-water stations, as a Federal interagency activity, for monitoring and concentration and distribution of pesticides in streams where potential contamination could result from continued or future application of the commonly used insecticides and herbicides. As part of a nationwide sampling of major drainage basins, water also is collected at one station to be analyzed for radioisotopes.
Water-quality samples are collected from a network of wells (fig. 9 and table 6 at the end of this report) to determine the chemical characteristics of ground water in the principal aquifers and to assess the suitability of the water for use in domestic and municipal supplies. The data also are used to establish an adequate data base for monitoring changes in water quality according to the provisions of the Safe Drinking Water Act, 1975. Other samples of ground water from various geologic formations at specific locations are analyzed for interpretive hydrologic investigations.
16

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Sediment data program PROJECT NUMBER: KS-004 COOPERATING AGENCY: Multi-agency PROJECT CHIEF: C. 0. Geiger
Problem Sediment concentrations and discharges in rivers and streams must be defined and monitored in order to make a comprehensive water-quality assessment of the Nation's water resources.
Objectives To provide a national data base of standardized sediment TnToTmaTToTn for use in State, local, and Federal planning and action programs, and to provide data for Federal management of interstate waters.
Approach A network of sediment stations (listed in table 5 at the end of this report) has been established to provide spatial and temporal averages and trends in concentration, discharge, and particle size of sediment being transported by rivers and streams. Water samples are collected on a routine basis at about 60 stations for analysis and determination or suspended-sediment discharge. In addition, periodic measurements are made of the particle-size distribution of suspended sediment and bed material.

Chemical

EXPLANATION -* Biologic.) T- Sediment

Note: numbers shown are abbreviated versions of the complete numbers given In tsxt

Dr.ln.g. b...n g Mitgouri River bagin 7 Arkansas River basin
Basin boundary

18

1447SO
Figure 8. Location of surface-water-quality gaging stations, 1984 water year. 19

I
U

h
*)-
4-
f
_
i.
-i- -' r 1 ll!

1 -I
i. J* .
r
- ['
i
IM
t --jf_ . ^.--i_-_^-. 4I

o
CM

REPUILIC »

« WASHIN6T6NI

MOWN

OGNIPHAN

CLOUD

CUT

RHEY

POTTAWATOMIE

JACKSON

SAUNA* SAIINE

DICKINSON

MARION

GEARY

WAIAUNSEE

' TO?tKA

" - ', "^

., KANSAS

" Jr*"

CITV

LAWRENC^ DOUfilAS

JOHNSON

LYON

Olliwi riUNKlIN

MIAMI

LINN

%ICHITA SEOIWICH

BUTIEK

SUMNEK

CDWUY

WOOOSON
-4J
WILSON

UUN

IOUMON

MONTGOMERY

LAKTTE

CHEJOKEE

MMNIt

Figure 9. Location of ground-water-quality sampling sites, 1984 water year.
21

PROJECT TITLE: National Atmospheric Deposition Program and National Trends Network Stations in Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-005 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: C. 0. Geiger
Problem In recent decades human activities have greatly increased both the abundance of substances dispersed 1n the atmosphere and their impact on the biosphere of the earth. These changes have resulted mainly from increases in: (1) Combustion of fossil fuels in power production, space heating, and transportation; (2) emmissions of dust, aerosols, and gases from industrial and land-management activities; (3) use of fertilizers and other chemicals in intensive agriculture and forestry; and (4) decomposition and combustion of industrial, urban, and agricultural wastes.
Objectives Establish a National Atmospheric Deposition Network to determine Tpatial and temporal trends in the supply of beneficial nutrient elements and injurious substances in precipitation and dry particulate matter. Determine the relative importance and contribution of precipitation, dry particulate matter, aerosols, and gases to the total atmospheric deposition. Coordinate research on the effects of changes 1n atmospheric deposition on: (1) Productivity of agricultural crops, forests, rangeland, wetlands, and surface water; (2) health and productivity of domestic food, wildlife and fish; and (3) corrosion of metals and other materials.
Approach Sites in Kansas, located on the Index map above, are equipped with an identical collector of wet/dry deposition, a recording rain gage, and pH and conductivity meters. Samples of precipitation are collected at each site on a weekly basis. During the first phase of network operations, analyses will be made for the following elements, ions, or other properties of each sample: sulfate, nitrate, phosphate, chloride, ammonia, potassium, calcium, magnesium, pH, acidity or alkalinity and conductivity. Later certain additional elements will be added including fluorine, bromine, manganese, zinc, copper, iron, molybdenum, boron, lead, mercury, iodine, nickel, cadmium, and vanadium. Pesticides and radioactive materials will also be added. To insure that the network data are of high quality to provide maximum credibility for a wide variety of fundamental research and mission-oriented purposes, a Quality Assurance Committee oversees the operations.
22

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Automated water-use data base 1n Kansas PROJECT NUMBER: KS-007 COOPERATING AGENCY: Division of Water Resources, Kansas State
Board of Agriculture PROJECT CHIEF: C. H. Baker, Jr.
Problem Use of Kansas waters and competition among types of uses are increasing each year. State water-rights agencies need detailed information about water use in order to effectively manage the resource. As part of the National Water-Use program in Kansas, plans have been made to create a State-operated and maintained water-use/water-rights data base. This long-term plan has come to the Immediate foreground by a growing concern within the State for automated handling of water-use/waterrights data. In order to facilitate the progress of the water-use program in Kansas and to ensure that the resulting State data base will fully meet the needs of the National Water-Use program, it is important for the U.S. Geological Survey to participate in the State data-base development.
Objective To design, implement, load, and evaluate an automated State water-use/water-rights data base. The data base will serve the dual functions of a management tool for administering water rights within the State and of acting as a repository for vital water-use data to meet National and State needs.
Approach Actual development of the data base will be done by the Kansas State Department of Administration, Division of Computer Services. Data capture, preparation, and input is handled jointly by the Division of Water Resources, Kansas State Board of Agriculture, and the State Division of Computer Services. U.S. Geological Survey personnel work closely with both State agencies to insure that all data elements needed for the National Water-Use program are provided in the data base and to provide for data exchange between the completed State data base and the National Water-Use Data System.
23

PROJECT TITLE: Hydro!ogic-data base for management decisions in Southwest Kansas Groundwater Management District No. 3
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-086 COOPERATING AGENCY: Southwest Kansas Groundwater Management District
No. 3 PROJECT CHIEF: L. E. Stullken
Problem Management, planning, and administration of water rights depend on the availability of and ready access to hydrologic data. State and local water agencies that must make these decisions have requested establishment of a system to provide current information on (1) largeyield wells in southwest Kansas, (2) the amount and time distribution of ground-water withdrawals, (3) the amount and location of irrigated acreage, (4) the hydraulic characteristics of the High Plains (Ogallala) aquifer, (5) the configuration of the water table, (6) the annual changes in saturated thickness, and (7) the movement of ground water through the aquifer system. Most of these data are readily amenable to storage, retrieval, and analysis using digital computers.
Objectives To develop and maintain a comprehensive hydrologic-data base for the area within the Southwest Kansas Groundwater Management District and to provide timely storage, retrieval, and analyses of the data for use principally by the Management District and by the Division of Water Resources, Kansas State Board of Agriculture, in the management, planning, and administration of water rights.
Approach Establish and monitor a comprehensive observation-well network, produce saturated-thickness maps, perform several aquifer tests on selected wells, and assist the Management District in measuring and monitoring ground-water withdrawals for irrigation. Compile all data pertinent to the hydrology of the area in readily accessible computer files for various analyses essential to management and administrative decisions.
24

PROJECT TITLE: Hydro!ogic-data base, Western Kansas Groundwater Management District No. 1
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-117 COOPERATING AGENCY: Western Kansas Groundwater Management District No. 1 PROJECT CHIEF: L. E. Stullken

Problem The original saturated thickness in Groundwater Management District No. 1 has been reduced 50 percent or more in five areas of the district covering about 225 square miles. Water is being pumped from the High Plains (Ogallala) aquifer 5 to 35 times faster than it is being recharged. Some irrigation wells have been abandoned, and the ground-
water supply is no longer adequate for some domestic wells in areas where the aquifer has been dewatered. The Management District needs a continuing data-collection and analysis program to provide information on ground-water conditions for making management decisions.

Objectives

(1) Maintain and operate water-level recorders at a

recharge reservoir, (2) collect continuous water-level data in problem

locations, (3) prepare ground-water depletion maps.

Approach -Continuous recorders monitor surface storage and ground-water conditions at the Janzen recharge reservoir. Hydrologic maps produced
using kriging techniques are supplied to the district annually. Previous maps have shown the water-table, the resulting errors-of-estimate from the kriging, saturated thickness, and percentage change in saturated thickness of the High Plains aquifer in west-central Kansas.

Reports

Pabst, M. E., and Dague, B. J., 1984, Percentage change in

saturated thickness of the High Plains aquifer, west-central Kansas, 1950

to average 1982-84: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations

Report 84-4357, scale 1: 125,000, 1 sheet.

25

HYDROLOGIC INVESTIGATIONS
Hydro!ogic investigations provide water-resources information that is valuable for a wide variety of uses by Federal, State, and local agencies, by the general public, and by universities and the consulting community. These investigations may include regional, state, county, and site-specific studies, as well as applied research. Some of the anticipated uses of the results of these investigations include general resources information and definition of hydrologic systems; water supply (planning and development); protection and conservation of resources; pollution detection, control, abatement, and enforcement; bridge, culvert, and highway design; public safety (flood warning and flood-plain delineation); salinity control and abatement; hazardous waste disposal; land management; and fish and wildlife resources management. These investigations help to assess the State's water resources in terms of quality, quantity, and use of water, and to develop the knowledge and hydrologic understanding necessary to predict the consequences of alternative plans and policies for water development and use.
Area! or Local Investigations
PROJECT TITLE: Effects of urbanization on flood runoff in the Wichita area
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-013
COOPERATING AGENCY: City of Wichita, Kansas
PROJECT CHIEF: C. A. Perry
Problem The effects of urbanization on flood-frequency discharges in Kansas have not been quantified. Sprawling urbanization in Wichita and vicinity has caused increased concern for the effect of urbanization on design discharges. Data on the magnitude and frequency of flood flows are needed in designing urban-drainage systems.
Objective Derive a method of estimating the relation of peak (flood) discharges to frequencies that is applicable to basins, with various degrees of urbanization, in the Wichita area.
Approach Rainfall-runoff data were collected in basins where the land use and percentage of impervious surface could be determined. The shape of unit hydrographs and changes resulting from urbanization were defined. A digital rainfall-runoff model for predicting peak discharges from small urbanized basins was tested and calibrated.
Reports Perry, C. A., and Hart, R. J., 1984, Flood-frequency estimates for five gaged basins in Wichita, Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4038, 23 p.
26

PROJECT TITLE: Availability and chemical quality of ground water from sandstone aquifers in southwest Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-079 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Geological Survey PROJECT CHIEF: Jack Kume
Problem A significant potential may exist for the development of ground-water supplies from sandstone units in Upper Permian, Upper Jurassic, and Lower Cretaceous rocks in southwest Kansas. Previous studies commonly considered the sandstone units as a single undifferentiated aquifer, which has lead to erroneous conclusions. Detailed studies are needed to define the geohydrology and the chemical quality of water in the sandstoneaquifer system.
Objectives Define the character of geologic formations that compose tfie sandstone-aquifer system; determine the geohydrologic relations between the individual aquifers; describe the chemical quality and suitability of water for most uses; and predict possible effects of groundwater development on the availability and chemical quality of water resulting from induced leakage between sandstone units.
Approach Data were compiled from previous studies and from existing wells and drill additional test wells to define the geologic and hydrologic characteristics of the sandstone-aquifer system. More detailed information on the areal extent, thickness, and degree of cementation of individual sandstone units and on the effects of hydraulic interconnection between units were obtained.
Reports Kume, Jack, and Spinazola, J. M., 1982, Geohydrologic data fromsandstone aquifers in southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-868, 112 p.
__1983, Depth and thickness of selected units in Upper Permian, Upper Jurassic, and Lower Cretaceous rocks in southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4095, scale 1: 500,000, 7 sheets.
27

PROJECT TITLE: Kansas-Nebraska Big Blue River Compact PROJECT NUMBER: KS-084 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: E. R. Hedman
Problem The Kansas-Nebraska Big Blue River Compact Administration insures equitable apportionment of waters of the Big Blue River between the states of Nebraska and Kansas.
Objective To administer the travel funds for the Federal RepresentaFTv<r"oT~the Compact.
Approach Travel costs incurred by Federal Representative are admi nistereHI
28

PROJECT TITLE: Geohydrology of Arkansas River valley in southwest Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-088
COOPERATING AGENCY: Division of Water Resources, Kansas State Board of Agriculture
PROJECT CHIEF: R. J. Lindgren
Problem Flow of the Arkansas River between the Colorado-Kansas State line and the Kearny-Finney County line in Kansas has continued to decrease in recent years. Consequently, the availability of surface water for diversion at the headgates of irrigation ditches has been inadequate to meet demands. Withdrawals of ground water from wells in the valley alluvium, which is hydraulically connected to the stream, are thought to be depleting streamflow and adversely affecting senior water rights.
Objectives Define the relationship between ground water and surface water in the Arkansas River valley and determine the effects of ground-water withdrawals on streamflow. Construct and calibrate a digital model of the river-aquifer system that can be used by State and local management agencies to improve conjunctive use of ground and surface waters within the constraints of water-rights structure in Kansas.
Approach The hydrologic boundaries of the stream-aquifer system, the hydraulic characteristics of the aquifer, the hydrologic stresses imposed on the system, and the effects of those stresses on ground-water storage and on streamflow were determined. These data were used in a digital model of the system to predict the results of various management alternatives designed to optimize conjunctive use of ground and surface waters.
Reports Barker, R. A., Dunlap, L. E., and Sauer, C. G., 1983, Analysis and computer simulation of stream-aquifer hydrology, Arkansas River valley, southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2200, 59 p.
Dunlap, L. E., Lindgren, R. J., and Sauer, C. G., 1983, Geohydrology and model analysis of stream-aquifer system along the Arkansas River in Kearny and Finney Counties, southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-222, 84 p.
29

PROJECT TITLE: Glacial deposits (Pleistocene) in northeast Kansas PROJECT NUMBER: KS-091 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Geological Survey PROJECT CHIEF: J. E. Denne
Problem ~ As population and demand for water increase in northeast Kansas, ground-water supplies are gaining in significance. They are especially important during periods of low precipitation when surfacewater supplies decline. Although the bedrock formations in the area generally contain little, if any, good-quality water, the glacial buriedvalley aquifers may yield up to several hundred gallons per minute of freshwater to wells.
Because the buried-valley aquifers are variable in location, extent, and hydrologic characteristics, detailed study of them is necessary. Current aquifer usage and development potential for domestic, municipal, agricultural, and industrial needs also must be evaluated. These analyses will allow realistic water-resource planning for the area. Knowledge of aquifer locations also should allow protection of ground water from contamination.
The geophysical techniques (for example, seismic, resistivity, and thermal) developed and utilized in this program should prove useful for studies of other unconsolidated aquifers in Kansas.
Objectives The objectives of this study are to: (1) locate and delineate the major Pleistocene aquifers of northeast Kansas, (2) determine ground-water levels in and saturated thicknesses of these aquifers, (3) analyze the Pleistocene stratigraphy and the character of the glacial deposits, (4) analyze the quality of waters contained in the Pleistocene aquifers, (5) determine current municipal, agricultural, and industrial usage of the aquifers, and (6) evaluate future potential of the aquifers for water supplies.
Approach ~ Buried-valley aquifers will be located by evaluation of existing hydrogeologic information, interpretation of maps and remotesensing data, and onsite work (drilling and geophysical investigations). Ground-water levels will be measured in wells and test holes, and saturated thicknesses will be calculated. Grain size and clay mineralogy of sediments will be analyzed for strati graphic correlation and aquifer evaluation. Chemical constituents of water from Pleistocene aquifers will be determined by sample analyses (performed by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment).
30

PROJECT TITLE: Hydrogeology of the "Equus beds" aquifer, central Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-092
COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Geological Survey PROJECT CHIEF: J. M. Spinazola
Problem Unconsolidated deposits of Pleistocene age, commonly known as the "Equus beds," are the major source of water for municipal, industrial, and irrigation use in central Kansas. Continued increasing withdrawals of water from this important aquifer can result in mining of water, reduced well yields, deterioration of water quality, and impairment of existing water rights.
Objective Determine the effects that increased ground-water withdrawals will have on (1) ground-water availability and (2) chemical quality of the ground water as they relate to the possible contamination of parts of the "Equus beds" as a result of induced movement of saline water now present in the aquifer and saline-water inflow from the underlying Wellington aquifer.
Approach Additional data were collected with special emphasis on defining the distribution of chloride concentrations in the aquifer and on modeling of the ground-water-flow system. An appropriate model was selected that would simulate the movement of saline water. Evaluation of the simulation will be made, and new model development may result.
31

PROJECT TITLE: Quality of water from urban runoff, Topeka PROJECT NUMBER: KS-096 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Health and Environment PROJECT CHIEF: L. M. Pope
Problem The Kansas Department of Health and Environment must obtain information to evaluate the impact of urbanization on the water resources of the State. Some Kansas counties are heavily urbanized, others currently are being urbanized, and still others are planned for urban development. One of the major urban developments in Kansas is in Shawnee County. A critical need exists for data relating to characteristics of urban runoff in the county, primarily with respect to the quality of water from runoff in the city of Topeka.
Objectives Establish a data base from selected study areas within the city of Topeka that will include streamflow, physiographic, climatic, and water-quality information. Evaluate the quality of water by defining the physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of runoff from selected urban areas under existing conditions and make projections of these characteristics of runoff that may occur with future urban development.
Approach Streamflow, physiographic, climatic, and water-quality data were collected at selected sites, which were equipped with streamgaging and water-quality monitoring equipment. Data was collected to determine the variation of water quality during storms and among seasons. Peak chemical concentrations were identified, and total constituent loads were calculated. Water-quality determinations consisted of major cations and anions, trace metals, nutrients, organic carbon, bacteria, and suspended sediment.
Reports Pope, L. M., Diaz, A. M., and Butler, M. K., 1983, Urban water-quality data and statistical summaries for selected sites in the Shunganunga Creek basin, Topeka, Kansas: Kansas Department of Health and Environment Bulletin B2-49, 203 p.
Pope, L. M., and Bevans, H. E., 1984, Relations of urban land-use and dry-weather, storm, and snowmelt flow characteristics to streamwater quality, Shunganunga Creek basin, Topeka, Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-750 (pending publication as a Water-Supply Paper).
32

PROJECT TITLE: Hydro!ogic consequences of strip mining the Mulberry coal in Miami, Linn, and Bourbon Counties of eastern Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-099 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: H. E. Bevans

Problem The thickest and most extensive remaining coal seam in Kansas is the Mulberry coal. Approximately 260 million short tons of
Mulberry coal underlie a 300-square-mile area in Miami, Linn, and Bourbon Counties of eastern Kansas. The great thickness of overburden, up to 100 feet, that must be removed to mine this relatively thin, less than
4 feet, coal seam makes the stripping ratio (thickness of overburden to coal) one of the highest in the Nation. Coal-mining activities can present both immediate and long-term hydro!ogic consequences. In order to protect
the hydrologic environment, State and Federal regulatory agencies and coal-mining companies require information regarding the premining hydrologic environment and the hydrologic consequences of coal mining.

Objectives Assemble and interpret the available hydrologic and related data necessary to describe the hydrologic environment. Determine
and collect additional hydrologic data needed to describe the hydrologic environment and the consequences of coal mining. Describe the hydrologic consequences of coal mining in the study area.

Approach

The investigation was carried out in a sequential three-

phase approach. Phase I assembled and interpreted available hydrologic

and related data in order to describe the hydrologic environment and

determine additional hydrologic data necessary to describe and determine

the effects of coal mining on the hydrologic environment. Phase II was

an intensive data-collection period that acquired the additional hydrologic

data. Phase III involved interpretation of hydrologic data to determine

the hydrologic consequences of coal mining in the study area.

Reports

Kenny, J. F., Bevans, H. E., and Diaz, A. M., 1982,

Physical and ,hydrologic environments of the Mulberry Coal reserves in

eastern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations

82-4074, 50 p.

Bevans, H. E., 1984, Hydrologic responses of streams to mining of the Mulberry Coal reserves in eastern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4047, 30 p.

33

PROJECT TITLE: Conjunctive-use models for North and South Fork Solomon Rivers, north-central Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-100 COOPERATING AGENCY: U.S. Bureau of Reclamation PROJECT CHIEF: J. E. Carr
Problem The management of surface and ground waters, which are used TorTFrigation in the Solomon Basin, is becoming more critical. Deficiencies in recent years of surface water for irrigation has resulted in the increasing use of ground water to supplement the available surface water. The conjunctive use of surface and ground waters will be required for optimal use of the water resources of the valleys. The streams and alluvial aquifers are in close hydraulic connection and should be studied as a stream-aquifer system.
Objective ~ The objective of the study is to evaluate various management alternatives for the stream-aquifer systems utilizing a digital model.
Approach A digital model of each stream-aquifer system was utilized. The modelwas capable of "inputing" streamflow, surface-water irrigation, pumping, and recharge on a monthly basis. Various water allocations, both of surface and ground waters, were tested as management alternatives, and prediction as to the response of the stream-aquifer system was made. The model of the valley of the South Fork Solomon River was studied as phase 1. The modeling of the North Fork Solomon River was considered as phase 2 and was initiated at about the completion of phase 1.
Reports Burnett, R. D., 1984, Predictive simulation of alternatives for managing the water resources of North Fork Solomon River valley between Kirwin Dam and Waconda Lake, north-central Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4249, 34 p.
34

\
PROJECT TITLE: Water resources of Ford County PROJECT NUMBER: KS-106 COOPERATING AGENCY: Southwest Kansas Groundwater Management District
No. 3 PROJECT CHIEF: J. M. Spinazola
Problem The rate of depletion of the water resources in Ford County has accelerated in recent years. Increased ground-water pumpage and coincident drought conditions have caused declines in water levels. Water levels in the unconsolidated aquifer have declined 7 to 10 feet since 1940. Industrial and agricultural demand for water continues to be strong, and available data are not adequate for local water managers to allocate the diminishing water supply in an equitable and hydrologically sound fashion.
Objectives (1) Update the hydrologic data base for the county, including an estimate of water use from the unconsolidated aquifer, (2) document the area! aquifer response to pumping stresses, and (3) determine the availability of water, for irrigation or other uses, as defined by the guidelines of the Southwest Kansas Groundwater Management District No. 3.
Approach The hydrologic data base was updated by an inventory of large-capacity wells in the county and by measurement of the discharge of about 8 percent of the wells. Total ground-water withdrawal was estimated by an evapotranspiration model, which utilized a soil-moisture accounting procedure. The aquifer's areal response to pumping is shown by a water-table map constructed during the pumping season. Availability of water for large-capacity wells were determined by using the water-table, map and the 9-square-mile depletion model developed by the U.S. Geological Survey for a previous project in west-central Kansas.
Reports Spinazola, J. M., and Dealy, M. T., 1983, Hydrology of the Ogailala aquifer in Ford County, southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4226, 58 p.
35

PROJECT TITLE: Effects of ground-water withdrawals on water levels and streamflow in the Arkansas River near Garden City
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-107 COOPERATING AGENCY: Division of Water Resources, Kansas State Board of
Agriculture
PROJECT CHIEF: R. J. Lindgren

Problem The flow of the Arkansas River at Garden City has diminished during the last decade such that the periods of no flow have increased from about 10 to 90 percent. Concurrently, large-scale irrigation has developed in the sandhills south of the river from the Bear
Creek fault in Kearny County to the vicinity of Garden City. Consequently, the yields of old irrigation wells near the river nave decreased, and the rate of water-level declines has accelerated. Recent requests for
appropriation of large quantities of ground water for industrial use in this area may adversely affect senior water rights.

Objectives Define the hydrologic relationships among the Arkansas River, the valley alluvial aquifer, and the underlying unconsolidated aquifer of the Ogallala Formation; determine the changes in the relation-
ship between the ground-water system and the Arkansas River; and construct, test, and apply a digital ground-water-flow model to determine the effects of pumping ground water from the unconsolidated High Plains
(Ogallala) aquifer south of the Arkansas River on flow of the river, on the yield of wells in the valley alluvial aquifer, and on water-level declines north of the river.

Approach Principal work items in this project were to determine: (1) the hydrologic boundaries of the stream-aquifer system, (2) the hy-
draulic characteristics of the aquifers, (3) the hydrologic stresses that are being imposed on the system, and (4) the effects of the hydrologic stresses on the stream-aquifer system. These data were used in a multi-
layer digital ground-water-flow model of the system to evaluate the effects of various management alternatives on the availability of ground water and on flow of the Arkansas River.

Reports

Dunlap, L. E., Lindgren, R. J., and Carr, J. E., 1984,

Projected effects of ground-water withdrawals in the Arkansas River

valley, 1980-99, Hamilton and Kearny Counties, southwestern Kansas:

U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4082,

168 p.

36

I
PROJECT TITLE: Geohydrology and water quality of deep-aquifer systems, Cretaceous and Jurassic ages, western Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-109 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Health and Environment PROJECT CHIEF: Jack Kume
Problem The High Plains aquifer system has been stressed extensive ly"T?T"much of western Kansas. The underlying rocks of Cretaceous and Jurassic ages contain permeable units that have potential for use as alternative sources of water supply. The permeable zones within these rocks are used for disposal of brine that results from oil and gas production. A real hazard exists for contamination of the Cretaceous-Jurassic aquifer system if brine disposal continues without a sound hydro!ogic basis.
Objectives Define the geohydrology of the rocks of Cretaceous and Jurassic agesin detail at selected sites. Determine the vertical and horizontal variation in chemical quality of water in the permeable zones and determine the hydraulic-head differences between permeable zones and across confining beds. Determine the hydraulic characteristics of principal permeable zones and regionalize the results using available geophysical logs and other oil- and gas-exploration data.
Approach Use lithologic and geophysical logs of oil and gas test wells to determine test-drilling sites. A test-drilling program provided detailed geohydrologic data needed to define the hydrology of the aquifers and the confining beds in the rocks of Cretaceous and Jurassic ages. Arrangements were made to re-enter three plugged and abandoned oil and gas test wells. Special well-completion tests were used in the abandoned wells, as applicable, to permit the independent measurements of hydraulic heads in permeable zones, the testing of hydraulic characteristics, and the collecting of ground-water samples.
Reports Kume, Jack, 1984, Geohydrology and chemical quailty of water in Middle and Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous rocks, western Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 844045, 54 p.
37

\

PROJECT TITLE: Geohydrology of Wellington Formation and Smoky Valley alluvium in Salina area, central Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-110 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: J. B. Gillespie

Hill

Problem Saline water is discharged from the alluvial aquifer into the Smoky Hill and Solomon Rivers east of Salina. The source of the saline water is brine from the underlying Wellington aquifer. The eastward movement of brine in the Wellington aquifer is believed to be confined to a limited cross section under the alluvium of the Smoky Hill Valley. A tight
confining shale layer occurs between the two aquifers northeast of Salina. The most promising method for alleviation of saline-water contamination of the aquifer-stream system may be the construction of a line of relief wells
in the area northeast of Salina. The brine discharged from the relief wells could possibly be injected into deep saline aquifers.

Objectives Define more accurately the area under which the brine is flowing eastward in the Wellington aquifer. Determine the volume of brine moving eastward and delineate any areas of saline-water contamination in
the alluvial aquifer in the Salina area. Determine location of relief wells to intercept eastward-flowing brine and predict the effects of different pumping alternatives on brine flow by using a digital model.

Approach Test holes were drilled on the north and south sides of the valley boundaries to determine if there is any brine flowing under-
neath the adjacent uplands. Also, additional wells were installed in the Wellington aquifer underlying the valley alluvium. Aquifer tests were conducted on these wells, and the brine was injected into the deep
Arbuckle aquifer. Short- and long-term aquifer tests were conducted on both aquifers simultaneously. Observation wells were augered in the alluvium. Water samples from both the Wellington and alluvial aquifers
were collected for chemical analysis. A quasi-three-dimensional digital model will be constructed to predict the effects of different pumping on brine flow.

38

PROJECT TITLE: Transit losses and traveltimes for reservoir release during drought conditions along the Neosho River from Council Grove Lake to lola, east-central Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-115 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: R. J. Hart
Problem The management of surface water and ground water, which are used for water supply and irrigation in the Neosho River, is becoming more critical. The use of water directly from the river for irrigation has increased in recent years. All the water supply available from John Redmond Reservoir, about 100 miles downstream from Council Grove, has been purchased; therefore, additional water supplies are only available from Council Grove Reservoir. Natural streamflow gains and losses in the river must be calculated to determine the required amount of water released at the reservoir to supply the target discharge at the point of use.
Objective ~ The purpose of this study is to determine the magnitude of naturalstreamflow gains and losses during drought conditions in two reaches of the Neosho River. One reach is from the outlet of Council Grove Reservoir to Neosho Rapids. The other reach is from the outlet of John Redmond Reservoir to the U.S. Geological Survey streamflow gage near lola.
Approach The approach to this study entailed a data-acquisition phase and a modeling phase. First, a data base was developed from existing data and additional data that were collected to adequately describe the stream-aquifer system. The modeling phase entailed selection, calibration, and verification of a stream-aquifer model. The modeling phase also was devoted to using the calibrated model to determine streamflow losses under varying reservoir-release conditions during drought conditions.
39

PROJECT TITLE: Quality of water in lead-zinc mined areas of southeast Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-119 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Health and Environment PROJECT CHIEF: T. B. Spruill
Problem Seepage from abandoned tailings piles and contaminated water from underground lead-zinc mines present a continuing source of chemical pollutants to ground and surface waters in a tri-state area that includes southwest Missouri, northeast Oklahoma, and southeast Cherokee County, Kansas. Determination of the characteristics and extent of pollution in the area is necessary in order to evaluate the severity of potential hazards to local water resources.
Objectives (1) Define water-quality characteristics of ground and surface waters of the lead-zinc mined areas, (2) determine extent and type of chemical pollution present, (3) describe the hydrology and geochemistry of the area.
Approach Collect water samples from mines, wells, and surfacewater STtes~Tor chemical analysis, compile historical water-quality and hydrologic data, and evaluate data using appropriate statistical and geochemical analytical techniques. The extent to which the natural hydrologic system has been affected by abandoned lead-zinc mines will be examined.
Reports Spruill, T. B., 1984, Assessment of water resources in lead-zinc mined areas in Cherokee County, Kansas, and adjacent areas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-439 (pending publication as a Water-Supply Paper), 102 p.
40

PROJECT TITLE: Hydrology of Coal Area 40, Western Interior Coal Province, Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-121 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: J. F. Kenny
Problem Continued production of coal in the Western Interior Coal Province will require the stripping and reclamation of large land-surface areas. In recognizing the potentially adverse effects of coal mining on water resources, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (Public Law 95-87) requires that comprehensive hydrologic information be provided on the general area prior to mining. This information is needed by surface-mine owners and operators and consulting engineers in the analysis of proposed mine sites and adjacent areas and by Federal and State regulatory agencies in appraising the adequacy of permit applications.
Objectives The U.S. Geological Survey is helping to provide data required by Public Law 95-87 through a series of reports covering the coal provinces nationwide. This study will provide broad hydrologic and related information and assess existing hydrologic conditions for Area 40 in southeastern Kansas, southwestern Missouri, and northeastern Oklahoma. Additional data needed to evaluate the impacts of strip mining on the water resources of Area 40 will be indicated, and extensive references to sources of more detailed information will be provided.
Approach Available data from previous and ongoing hydrologic investigations were compiled by personnel from the Kansas and Oklahoma Districts. These data will be presented in a report consisting of a brief text with an accompanying map, chart, graph, or other illustration for each of a number of water-resources related topics. The summation of the topical discussions will provide a description of the hydrology of Area 40.
Reports Marcher, M. V., Kenny, J. F., and others, 1983, Hydrology of Area 40, Western Region, Interior Coal Province, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Missouri: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-266, (in press).
41

PROJECT TITLE: Natural ground-water recharge dynamics in the Kansas Plains
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-122 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Geological Survey PROJECT CHIEFS: Marios Sophocleous and C. A. Perry
Problem Recent large-scale irrigation development in Kansas and the consequent declines in ground-water supplies focused attention on ground-water-recharge rates. These rates are not sufficient to meet the current demands over a long period of time. The lack of detailed information about natural recharge aggravates the problems of planning for and managing the ground-water resources of Kansas.
Objectives (1) Investigate the mechanisms of natural ground-water recharge; (2) quantify the amount of recharge water and specify its time distribution for two areas in Kansas, one in the "Equus beds" and the other in the Big Bend region; (3) study and evaluate the latest technology with regard to instrumentation and techniques for studying ground-water recharge; and (4) coordinate onsite and laboratory measurements with mathematical modeling techniques to develop improved methods of estimating ground-water recharge.
Approach Two experimental sites were instrumented to provide integrated and automated measurements of the subsurface flow regime on a year-round basis. Onsite data were supplemented with laboratory determinations and were used to modify numerical models and thus to better understand and predict the recharge process.
Reports Sophocleus, Marios, and Perry, C. A., 1984, Experimental studies in natural groundwater recharge dynamics Assessment of recent advances in instrumentation: Journal of Hydrology, v. 70, p. 369-382.
42

PROJECT TITLE: Effects of irrigation return flow on the chemical quality of water in the Smoky Hill River, Prairie Dog Creek, and Republican River, Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-125 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Health and Environment
PROJECT CHIEF: T. B. Spruill

Problem Although ground water now provides the principal source of
irrigation water in central and western Kansas, surface-water sources may become more important in the future because of gradual depletion of groundwater reservoirs. Application of irrigation water in a semiarid region,
such as western Kansas, may cause changes in the local hydro!ogic regime, as well as causing potentially deleterious changes in the soils and in ground- and surface-water quality. Water draining from an irrigated
basin may be rendered unfit for other beneficial uses. There is a need to document current conditions and possible long-term deleterious effects of irrigation to provide information useful for management decisions directed at minimizing these problems.

Objectives

(1) Areally define post-irrigation season surface-

and ground-water quality characteristics within the irrigation districts

and adjacent areas in the Prairie Dog Creek and Republican River valleys.

(2) Statistically compare possible differences in surface- and ground-

water quality of areas within each irrigaton district that are minimally

irrigated, irrigated with ground water, and irrigated with surface

water. (3) Define possible seasonal changes in hydrologic conditions

and ground- and surface-water quality of areas that are minimally irri-

gated, irrigated with ground water, and irrigated with surface water.

(4) Determine possible long-term effects of ground- and surface-water

quality in the Cedar Bluff and Almena Irrigation Districts.

Approach

Irrigation, domestic, and public-supply wells were

selected in each of the three areas for water-quality sampling. Each of

these areas contained 6 to 15 wells. Samples of well water in the Almena

and Cedar Bluffs Districts were collected during the fall 1981, and

spring, summer, and fall 1982. Samples of well water in the Bostwick

District were collected from April to November 1982. Several seepage

investigations were also conducted in each area. Data obtained from

the study will be statistically analyzed to determine significant areal,

seasonal, and temporal changes in water quality.

43

PROJECT TITLE: Hydrology of the Lower Cretaceous sandstone aquifers of southwest Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-127 COOPERATING AGENCY: Groundwater Management District No. 3 PROJECT CHIEF: K. R. Watts
Problem Sandstones of Early Cretaceous age form a major aquifer system in southwest Kansas. As the heavily developed High Plains aquifer becomes depleted, more water users will tap the resources of these deeper aquifers. The Southwest Kansas Groundwater Management District No. 3 is responsible for controlling development of ground-water resources in parts of southwest Kansas, and has established criteria for well spacing and yield appropriation of ground water. Detailed knowledge of the hydrology of the sandstone aquifers and possible hydraulic connections with the High Plains aquifer and underlying aquifers is needed so that the Management District may refine their selection criteria.
Objective To define the hydro!ogic boundaries, aquifer characteristic sanTTTuxes, potentiometric surfaces, water quality, and the watersupply potential of the sandstone aquifers and their connection with the High Plains aquifer.
Approach (1) Lithologic and geophysical data were used to refine the knowledge of the geologic and hydrologic boundaries of these aquifers;
(2) aquifer characteristics, transmissivity, and storativity were determined from pump-test data;
(3) water-level information was collected from observation wells;
(4) water use from the aquifers was estimated for major water-use categories;
(5) an inventory of large-capacity wells completed in the Dakota aquifer will be used to update the Ground-Water Site Inventory (GWSI) files; and
(6) a three-dimensional finite-element ground-water flow model consisting of up to five layers will be calibrated and used to evaluate management strategies.
44

PROJECT TITLE: Natural ground-water recharge in Harvey County, Kansas PROJECT NUMBER: KS-128 COOPERATING AGENCY: Harvey County PROJECT CHIEF: C. A. Perry

Problem The "Equus beds" aquifer supplies large quantities of water for cities including Wichita and Newton, as well as for irrigation, at a steadily increasing rate. To best direct development in this area, the Harvey County Planning Office needs information on the natural recharge of this aquifer in areas where the lithology of the unsaturated zone is different.

Objective ~ To determine natural ground-water recharge rates in areas of different soil types in Harvey County.

Approach Three sites were established in conjunction with the ongoing necTiaTge project, KS-122. Sites were equipped with an observation well, a neutron moisture-probe access tube, and a recording rain gage. The data collected were used in an unsaturated-flow simulation model to estimate the natural ground-water recharge.

Reports

Perry, C. A., 1984, Natural ground-water-recharge data

from three selected sites in Harvey County, south-central Kansas: U.S.

Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-457, 31 p.

45

PROJECT TITLE: Hydrology of Coal Area 39, Western Interior Coal Province, Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-129 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: H. E. Bevans
Problem The Kansas part of Coal Area 39 of the Western Interior Province contains approximately 295 megatons of strippable bituminous coal reserves. The Marais des Cygnes, Little Osage, and Marmaton Rivers drain the area. Large stripping ratios (overburden thickness/coal thickness) will require large volumes of land to be disturbed during mining operations. Comprehensive hydrologic information is needed to help guide mining operators, regulatory agencies, legislators, and the public in assessing the hydrologic consequences of coal mining in this area.
Objectives The objectives of this investigation are to assemble and interpret existing hydrologic and related data to: (1) Evaluate the adequacy of the existing data, (2) define current hydrologic and related conditions, (3) describe the hydrologic consequences of coal mining, and (4) determine additional data and investigations needed to assess the hydrologic impacts of coal mining.
Approach Historic data and data collected from ongoing hydrologic investigations were compiled and interpreted in a report that will consist of a series of maps, each with a brief text describing a water-resources related topic. These maps depict hydrologic and related environments.
Reports Bevans, H. E., Skelton, John, Kenny, J. F., and Davis, J. V., 1984, Hydrology of Area 39, Western Region, Interior Coal Province, Kansas and Missouri: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-851 (in press).
46

PROJECT TITLE: Estimating stream-aquifer interactions in coal areas of eastern Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-131 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: H. E. Bevans
Problem Information about stream-aquifer interactions in coal areas of eastern Kansas, necessary to predict and manage the effects of strip mining, is generally unavailable because of the lack of aquifer-test data. Previously developed quantitative analytical procedures are available that can provide alternative approaches to estimating stream-aquifer interactions. There is a need to demonstrate the application and evaluate the accuracy of these procedures.
Objectives The objectives of this investigation are to: (1) DemonstTateTKeapplication of quantitative analytical procedures for estimating stream-aquifer interactions, (2) evaluate the accuracy and transferability of the procedures, and (3) develop a method for estimating stream-aquifer interactions for ungaged streams in coal areas of eastern Kansas.
Approach Available streamflow data were utilized in quantitative analytical procedures to estimate stream-aquifer interactions in coal areas of eastern Kansas. The estimated interactions were compared between subareas to determine their transferability within the study area.
47

PROJECT TITLE: Availability of natural and regulated streamflows for instream uses during historical droughts, lower Neosho River, southeastern Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-133 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: R. J. Hart
Problem: The magnitude of natural streamflow and reservoir releases needed to achieve minimum desirable flows are critical to the management of water resources in the Neosho River basin. The volume of reservoir storage needed for augmentation of natural flows has not been determined for either typical or more severe conditions.
Objectives The objectives of this project are to quantify augmentation requirements during historical drought periods lasting from 1 to 4 years. The project will also determine the magnitude of reservoir storage necessary to maintain these flows through releases and the magnitude and duration of deficiencies in flow resulting from lesser amounts of storage.
Approach The basic approach of this project was to compare recommended desirable flows to observed and simulated daily streamflow during three drought periods. The analyses were done separately for both natural flow conditions and for flow regulated by John Redmond Reservoir. Flow simulation was provided by a reservoir-routing model and a streamflowrouting model.
Reports Hart, R. J., and Stiles, T. C., 1984, Availability of natural and regulated streamflows for instream uses during historical droughts, lower Neosho River, southeastern Kansas: U.S,. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4292, 42 p.
48

PROJECT TITLE: Transit loss, travel times, and related hydraulic and hydro! ogic characteristics of selected stream-aquifer systems
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-134 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: P. R. Jordan
Problem For most stream reaches downstream from the major water-supply reservoirs in Kansas, little is known of losses of streamflow to bank storage, ground water, and evapotranspiration. The components of the natural system must be evaluated during various combinations of natural conditions and reservoir releases in order to provide information for the sound planning and management of water supplies.
Objectives (1) Define the hydraulic and hydrologic characteristics of selected stream-aquifer systems. (2) Quantify the movement of water between stream, aquifer, and atmosphere. (3) Evaluate the effects of changes in natural hydrologic conditions and of specific water management alternatives.
Approach Currently under study is the Cottonwood River. The project will begin with selection of a model after examination of the available stream-aquifer models through literature review and consultation with knowledgeable individuals. Existing data will be assembled and interpreted. New data will be collected where needed. The model will be calibrated, then used to simulate a variety of conditions that might occur naturally or be imposed.
49

PROJECT TITLE: Hydrology and water quality of Sedgwick County, Kansas PROJECT NUMBER: KS-136 COOPERATING AGENCIES: Sedgwick County and the city of Wichita PROJECT CHIEF: H. E. Bevans
Problem Increasing population in Sedgwick County, the most populous county in Kansas, and in Wichita, its principal city, requires careful management of county water resources to provide adequate supplies for domestic, industrial, and irrigation use. The county and city currently (1984) are relying on information from a 1965 geohydrologic study to manage their water resources. Current information regarding the availability and quality of ground- and surface-water resources is necessary to determine changes since 1965 and to predict future impacts.
Objectives This study will be directed towards: (1) Inventorying the current quantity and quality of surface- and ground-water resources in Sedgwick County; (2) evaluating the water resources with respect to supplies required for domestic, industrial, and irrigation uses; and (3) determining trends with respect to the quantity and quality of the water resources over the past 20 years to predict future impacts.
Approach A thorough review of available data and literature will be used to establish a frame of reference for determining trends in county water resources and to determine additional data needs. Land-use and water-use data will be compiled and analyzed to establish a representative data-collection network. Additional water data will be collected for developing a potentiometric-surface map, describing water-quality characteristics of ground and surface waters, constructing a solutetransport model for determining the effects of ground-water withdrawals on water quality in the Arkansas River alluvium south of Wichita, quantifying ground- and surface-water resources available for county supplies, and determining trends by comparisons to historical data.
50

Statewide or Regional Investigations
STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Flood hydrology and hydraulics for transportation applications.
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-010 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Transportation PROJECT CHIEF: R. U. Clement
Problem There is a continuing need for adequately defined floodfrequency characteristics for Kansas streams to assist in the efficient design of highway-drainage structures, for flood-plain analysis, and to evaluate flood-risk factors. Long-term records of annual peak discharges are necessary to adequately define flood-frequency characteristics. Although streamflow records have been collected on Kansas streams since 1895, they are limited primarily to those streams that drain areas larger than 100 square miles. Very little long-term data are available for streams draining areas of less than 100 square miles.
Objectives Define the flood-frequency characteristics on gaged streams in Kansas using long-term data, both observed and synthesized, and develop techniques to extend those characteristics to ungaged locations.
Approach Records of annual peak discharges for small drainage areas are obtained from a crest-stage gage network. Selected crest-stage gage sites are equipped to collect simultaneous records of continuous rainfall and discharge. Long-term records of annual peak discharges are synthesized through the use of a rainfall-runoff model and a record of long-term rainfall. Data for large drainage areas are available from the regular stream-gaging network. Flood-frequency relations, determined by statistical methods, are extended to ungaged sites by using physical and climatic factors.
Reports Clement, R. W., 1983, Improvement of flood-frequency estimates for selected small watersheds in eastern Kansas using a rainfallrunoff model : U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4110, 22 p.
51

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Streamflow characteristics PROJECT NUMBER: KS-011 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: P. R. Jordan
Problem There is a need to express basic Streamflow records in more useful forms and to develop improved methods of estimating the frequency of various types of flow in gaged and ungaged streams in Kansas.
Objectives Define the significant characteristics of Streamflow in Kansas; determine the interrelation between Streamflow and ground-water storage; analyze and summarize existing data in useful terms for developing optimum benefit from the available water supplies and optimum protection from floods.
Approach Analyze significant Streamflow characteristics and update results of previous studies using improved methods applied to initial data and additional data from 16 to 20 years of record, particularly the data from small drainage basins. Where available, improved analytical techniques will be used to determine flow probabilities.
Reports ~ Jordan, P. R., 1983, Magnitude and frequency of low flows of unregulated streams in Kansas, and estimation of flow-duration curves for ungaged sites: Kansas Water Office Technical Report No, 17, 55 p.
52

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Evaluation of the Ground-Water-Quality Monitoring Network PROJECT NUMBER: KS-077 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Health and Environment PROJECT CHIEF: T. B. Spruill
Problem Data on the chemical quality of ground water is needed from a statewide network of wells in response to State and Federal regulations imposed by the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-523). A continuing evaluation of the adequacy of the network is needed for monitoring ground-water quality in the principal aquifers of the State. These data are necessary for effective management decisions regarding the State's water resources.
Objective Evaluate the chemical-quality data to determine the adequacy ofthe network for describing baseline ground-water quality, to detect pollution of the principal aquifers in the State, and to determine the significance of the data in respect to State and Federal water-quality standards imposed by the Safe Drinking Water Act.
Approach Collect water samples for chemical analysis from a statewide TietwoFF" of about 500 wells. The wells will be sampled to provide baseline data for determining the general chemical quality of ground water in the principal aquifers and to provide a basis for detecting possible long-term changes in regional ground-water quality. Interpretation of sampled data will continue, and the adequacy of data will be reanalyzed for detecting changes in chemical quality and in local occurrence of pollution.
Reports Spruill, T. B., 1983a, Relationship of nitrate concentrations to distance of well screen openings below casing water levels: American Water Resources Association, Water Resources Bulletin, v. 19, no. 6, December 1983, p. 977-981.
___1983b, Statistical summaries of selected chemical constituents in Kansas ground-water supplies, 1976-81: U.S. Geological Survey OpenFile Report 83-263, 29 p.
__1984, Use of data from regional ground-water-quality monitoring networks: 29th Annual Midwest Groundwater Conference, Proceedings, Lawrence, Kansas, October 1-4, 1984, p. 12.
53

STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Potential for liquid-waste injection into the Arbuckle Group
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-078 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Geological Survey PROJECT CHIEF: J. E. Carr
Problem Rocks of the Arbuckle Group, which underlie nearly all of Kansas, are important oil reservoirs in much of the State and are an important freshwater aquifer in the southeastern part. The rocks also are a primary horizon for waste disposal, particularly oilfield brine. Little is known about the regional geohydrology and the potential effects of contamination to freshwater aquifers.
Objectives Determine the regional geohydrology of the Arbuckle Group from available data and further define the Arbuckle Group by making a preliminary assessment of the potential for waste injection to the aquifer. Determine the hydraulic characteristics and potential for liquid-waste injection in selected areas.
Approach Data were compiled to determine the areal extent and thickness of aquifers, the areal changes in hydraulic characteristics and chemical characteristics of the water, and the configuration of the potentiometric surface of saline water in the Arbuckle and other aquifers. Test wells were installed at selected sites to determine aquifer properties and chemical quality. Modeling techniques will be used to evaluate the potential for future injection and storage of liquid wastes and to assess the effects of waste injection on freshwater aquifers.
Reports Gogel, Tony, 1981, Preliminary data from Arbuckle test wells, Miami, Douglas, Saline, and Labette Counties, Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-1112, 156 p.
54

PROJECT TITLE: Techniques for estimating ground-water withdrawals in western Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-090 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: C. H. Baker, Jr.
Problem One of the principal unknown factors in quantitative ground-water hydrology and management of ground-water resources is the quantity of water withdrawn for irrigation use. The measurement of ground-water pumpage by installation of totalizing flow meters is possible but very expensive.
Objectives -- Investigate methods, other than metering of wells, for determining the withdrawal of ground water from irrigation wells in Kansas with an acceptable degree of accuracy and test such methods by application to a large irrigated area.
Approach The project was divided into two parts: Part 1 was to list, describe, and evaluate different methods of obtaining discharges at a well site and for an area; Part 2 was to field test any suitable method(s) evaluated in Part 1 on a large irrigated area, such as a groundwater management district.
Reports Baker, C. H., Jr., 1983, Evaluation of techniques for estimating ground-water withdrawals for irrigation in western Kansas: Kansas Water Office Bulletin 26, 14 p.
55

PROJECT TITLE: Aquifer-test evaluation PROJECT NUMBER: KS-093 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Geological Survey PROJECT CHIEF: J. B. Gillespie
Problem Presently ongoing aquifer appraisal projects in eastern Kansas require accurate determination of aquifer charateristies. The files of the U.S. Geological Survey, Kansas Geological Survey, and Division of Water Resources of the Kansas State Board of Agriculture contain numerous aquifer tests that have been conducted since 1937. These tests need to be reanalyzed to provide a cohesive set of reliable aquifer parameters. Aquifer parameters are the basic building blocks for all quantitative aquifer evaluations.
Objectives To create an accurate reproducible documented file of aquifer parameters by aquifer and by area for use in ongoing areal investigations and investigations that are scheduled to begin in the next fiscal year.
Approach All available aquifer tests in eastern Kansas were cornpi ledTaHdthe tests were evaluated for adequacy of documentation. Supplemental data were collected as needed. Appropriate analytical or numerical techniques were determined and applied to each aquifer test. Aquifer-test results will be collated.
56

PROJECT TITLE: High Plains regional Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-094 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: L. E. Stullken

aquifer-system

analysis,

western

Problem The Ogallala Formation is the principal aquifer underlying the High Plains. The aquifer contains about 2 billion acre-feet of water in storage, but water is being withdrawn for irrigation in excess of the rate of natural replenishment. The economic future of the High Plains in eight states, including Kansas, is dependent upon the capacity of the
aquifer to sustain withdrawals. A detailed knowledge of the aquifer system is needed so that the. system can be simulated, water-management alternatives evaluated, and the economic life of the aquifer projected.

Objective Previous studies of the hydrology of the High Plains have been limited by political boundaries. This study will provide a
regional description of the water resources and the operation of the hydrologic system consistent with the natural hydrologic boundaries of the High Plains.

Approach

Existing hydrologic data were compiled and reviewed.

Data-collection networks were revised or initiated to provide adequate

coverage for the study area. The data were regionalized to provide

a detailed description of the aquifer system and stored in a digital

computer for processing and retrieval. Computer simulations of flow in

the aquifer system were made to evaluate additional data needs and

add to knowledge of the system's flow characteristics.

Reports Pabst, M. E., and Stullken, L. E., 1981, Altitude and configuration of water table in High Plains aquifer in Kansas, 1980: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations, Open-File Report
81-1004, scale 1: 500,000, 1 sheet.

___1982a, Altitude and configuration of water table in High Plains
aquifer, 1960: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-429, scale 1: 500,000, 1 sheet.

___1982b, Altitude and configuration of water table in High Plains aquifer, 1970: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-448, scale 1: 500,000, 1 sheet.

__1982c, Altitude and configuration of water table in High Plains aquifer, 1965: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-449, scale 1:
500,000, 1 sheet.

57

High Plains regional aquifer-system analysis, western Kansas (KS-094)-Continued Reports Continued Stullken, L. E., and Pabst, M. E., 1981, Altitude and configuration
of water table in High Plains regional aquifer system of Kansas, 1975: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-144, scale 1: 500,000, 1 sheet.
__1982, Altitude and configuration of water table in High Plains aquifer of Kansas, pre-1950: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-117, scale 1: 500,000, 1 sheet.
Watts, K. R., and Stullken, L. E., 1981, Generalized configuration of the base of the High Plains aquifer in Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-344, scale 1: 500,000, 1 sheet.
58

\
STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Central Midwest regional aquifer-system analysis, Kansas PROJECT NUMBER: KS-111 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: R. J. Wolf
Problem The hydrology of the freshwater, brackish-water, and saline-water aquifer systems in rocks of Cambrian-Ordovician to Cretaceous ages is not well defined. Because of the increased demand for water from the overlying High Plains aquifer system in western Kansas, aquifers in this deeper rock system are being looked upon as a potential source of additional water supply. In addition, increased pumpage in eastern Kansas has caused saline-water encroachment into aquifers of this rock system. Added to these problems are those resulting from injection of industrial wastes and oilfield brine into these rocks.
Objectives Describe the hydrology of the freshwater, brackishwater, and saline-water aquifer systems in rocks of Cambrian-Ordovician to Cretaceous ages. Create a regional data base for the rock systems and describe present and potential problems associated with current and future water use. Evaluate the aquifer-system's response to future stresses.
Approach A search of the available literature was made to determine the extent of geologic-framework interpretations and available data. Data were compiled to establish a data base of regional significance that includes detailed lithologic descriptions for selected wells, water-quality information, hydraulic characteristics of the rock systems, and information on water use, waste disposal, and brine injection. Appropriate maps will be prepared for steady-state digital-model construction to test the conceptual-flow system and to define additional data needs to calibrate a digital model capable of simulating the flow system for predictive purposes.
59

PROJECT TITLE: Determination of flood volume in small basins in western Kansas using CSI peak discharge and storm depth-duration
PROJECT NUMBER: KS 81-113 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: C. A. Perry
Problem In western Kansas, there is a need for determining floodflow volumes at locations other than those served by continuous-record gaging stations. Many smaller streams have crest-stage indicator (CSI) gages that provide measurement of peak discharge. If a relationship could be developed so that storm-runoff volumes could be evaluated from CSI peak discharges, useful estimates could be made for discharge volumes. This additional information on flood-flow volumes is needed for developing better generalized volume-frequency relations.
Objective Develop relationships among peak discharge, storm depth-duration, and observed streamflow volume for individual storms at continuous-record stations in a form that can be used to estimate flow volume for individual storms at CSI gages on small basins in western Kansas.
Approach Relationships between physical and climatic characteristics, raTnTaTl depth-duration, and flood hydrographs were examined at continuous-record stations. An effective base length was determined using a triangular-hydrograph equation. Rainfall depth-duration determination was improved by using average storm movement for the region. Multivariate regression techniques were used to develop a predictive equation for calculating flood volumes at CSI sites.
Reports Perry, C. A., 1984, A method of estimating flood volumes in western Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4164, 18 p.
60

\
STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: High-flow volume-frequency relations for Kansas PROJECT NUMBER: KS-116 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Water Office PROJECT CHIEF: P. R. Jordan
Problem Better information on high-flow volumes is needed as a basis for review of existing and planned reservoirs. Information based on adequate records of observed flows is superior to synthetic hydrographs based on estimated runoff relations and average storm patterns. State regulations require certain classes of new reservoirs to provide flood-control storage equal to the inflow volume of specified frequency. Inspection of existing reservoirs for safety must include consideration of the volumes of flood water they must store or pass through.
Objectives ~ The study will provide high-flow volume information that can be used in design of new reservoirs and safety evaluation of existing reservoirs. Emphasis will be on small streams. The report will provide high-flow volume-frequency information at gaging stations throughout Kansas and will provide relations to basin characteristics that can be used for ungaged sites.
Approach The study used available data from gaging stations with at least 10 years of record and drainage areas smaller than 3,000 square miles. Data on basin characteristics were available for these stations. High-flow volume frequency characteristics were determined using WATSTORE program A969 and statistical curve fitting. Some study of skew coefficients were needed for the curve fitting. A stepwise multiple-regression model then was used to determine relations of high-flow volumes to basin characteristics.
Reports Jordan, P. R., 1984, Magnitude and frequency of high flows of unregulated streams in Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-453 (pending publication as a Water-Supply Paper), 45 p.
61

\
STATEWIDE
PROJECT TITLE: Kansas surface-water network evaluation using Kalman filtering (KCERA) techniques
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-130 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: K. D. Medina
Problem The Water Resources Division of the U.S. Geological Survey operates in excess of 100 streamflow-gaging stations in Kansas. It is essential that an analysis be made of this network to assure maximum cost effectiveness, in concert with the uses of the data, the accuracy of the data, and the availability of other methodologies for providing the data.
Objectives Analyze historical hydrologic data to achieve optimum benefit from available supplies, and evaluate surface-water networks with respect to cost effectivenes, network design, and data use and accuracy.
Approach -- The surface-water network was evaluated using K-CERA techniques, which included identification of data uses, costs, and needs.
Reports Medina, K. D., and Geiger, C. 0., 1984, Evaluation of the cost effectiveness of the 1983 stream-gaging program in Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4107, 57 p.
62

PROJECT TITLE: Effects of multipurpose use on the water quality of public water-supply lakes
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-132 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Health and Environment PROJECT CHIEF: L. M. Pope
Problem Assessment of the water-quality characteristics of selected public water-supply lakes in eastern Kansas can be used to evaluate their suitability as drinking-water supplies. The use of lakes for various activities can affect the quality of water in such a manner that may accelerate natural eutrophication processes, which, in turn could increase the concentrations of organic substances in the water. The contribution of nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) by the inflow from the area drained by the lake(s) can enhance the growth of the phytoplankton populations and algae, which can also accelerate the eutrophication processes. The increased concentrations of organic substances, nutrients, phytoplankton, and algae can cause taste, odor, and turbidity problems and pose a potential for the formation of organohalides as byproducts of the interaction of disinfectants with natural organic substances.
Objectives The purpose of this investigation is to evaluate the effects of multipurpose use on the water quality of selected public water supply lakes. Specific objectives of the investigation are to: (1) Identify and quantify organic chemicals, nutrients, and phytoplankton populations; (2) determine seasonal and spatial variations in organic chemicals, nutrients, phytoplankton populations, and dissolved oxygen; (3) select lakes representative in size, age, trophic state, and degree of waterquality degradation for an intensive 3-5 year investigation.
Approach -- A reconnaissance survey of selected public water-supply lakes was made in eastern Kansas. The selection of lakes was based on variations in size and management practices. Water samples were collected during low-flow conditions when water-quality degradation was most apparent and when water-treatment plants were experiencing taste and odor problems. Water samples were collected at inflow and outflow points of the lake and at points within the lake selected by determinations of spatial variation in temperature, dissolved oxygen, pH, specific conductance, and turbidity. The water samples were analyzed for dissolved solids, nutrients, chlorophyll a, and total and organic carbon. The resultant water-quality data wilT be analyzed and used to select lakes for more intensive study.
63

PROJECT TITLE: Water quality in the High Plains aquifer, western Kansas, related to petroleum production, irrigated, and nonirrigated cropping land use
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-135 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: L. E. Stullken
Problem Little is known about the contamination of the High Plains aquifer by organic compounds and trace metals. Agricultural chemicals applied at land surface to control weeds and insects are potentially hazardous to public health as they infiltrate to the water table. Contamination by oilfield brines presents yet another hazard. Sample collection and data interpretation with special emphasis on the relation of organic substances and trace metals in ground water to agricultural use and oilfield brines are needed.
Objectives To provide the intensive data collection and analysis needed to thoroughly describe the current quality of water associated with major types of land use in the High Plains of Kansas (petroleum production and irrigated and dryland farming). Special attention to analysis of trace metals and organic substances is needed because of the present lack of this information. Project results are expected to provide water quality and land-use relationships that will have transfer value to other areas of similar climate and geohydrology.
Approach A four-phase approach of reconnaissance, network design, intensive sampling, and analysis/reporting will be used. In phase 1, "typical" areas will be selected, researched, and some initial samples collected and analyzed. In phase 2, statistical techniques (for example, kriging) will be used to design an optimized network for further sampling. Phase 3 will consist of locating, drilling, and sampling from observation wells as indicated by network design. Phase 4 will consist of a thorough data analysis and reporting of results.
64

STATEWIDE

PROJECT TITLE: Geohydrologic evaluation of hazardous waste sites selected areas of Kansas
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-138 COOPERATING AGENCY: Kansas Department of Health and Environment
PROJECT CHIEF: T. B. Spruill

in

Problem Hazardous-waste sites can pose significant risks to the public health and quality of the environment. At least 201 potential hazardous-waste sites have been identified in Kansas (Kansas Department
of Health and Environment, written commun., 1983). The State has performed an initial assessment of 81 sites. There is a need to document which of the remaining sites have contaminated ground and surface waters in Kansas and to identify those sites that warrant intensive geohydrologic investigation.

Objectives Principal objectives of the study are to: (1) Compile site history, hydrogeologic, and chemical-quality information to document
possible ground- and surface-water contamination at selected hazardous-
waste sites in Kansas; (2) identify principal chemical contaminants that may be associated with specific types of hazardous-waste sites (private, county, municipal, industrial, etc.) in specific regions of the State; (3) determine principal geochemical and hydrogeologic factors that affect the mobility of major chemical contaminants from harzardous-waste sites
in selected regions of the State.

Approach Information will be collected for each site, including types of waste stored, mode of storage, time of storage, and geology.
Surface geophysical methods will be used to detect possible contaminant plumes. Water samples, water levels, and geophysical logs will be ob-
tained from piezometers. Water samples will be analyzed for major
cations and anions, nitrate and ammonia nitrogen, trace metals, total organic carbon, and specific organic compounds. Principal contaminants associated with each waste-site category will be identified.

65

Research Projects
PROJECT TITLE: Development of distributed information systems PROJECT NUMBER: KS-102 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: J. M. McNellis
Problem Increasing demand for information about water resources coupled with personnel ceilings slows assessment and distribution of water data. Technology transfer in the computer area is slow to almost nonexistent, particularly for end users.
Objectives The primary objective is to demonstrate the feasibility of putting additional computer power in the hands of individual end-user. Technology transfer will accelerate among users, and timely assessment and distribution of water data will occur. A secondary objective is the development of an RFP (Request for Purchase) for acquisiton of microcomputers within WRD.
Approach PRIME minicomputers have been installed in almost all District and many Subdistrict offices in WRD. This is a direct result of the prototype study using HARRIS minicomputers carried on in the Kansas and New Mexico District offices. The prototype studies were of material importance in the generation of the RFP that the PRIMES were acquired with. Headquarters in Reston and some District offices will acquire or have already acquired IBM PC/AT microcomputers. These are 16-bit, 2-byte microcomputers that support up to 3 million characters of memory, 3 users, 40,000,000 characters of information on disk, have good graphics capability, and have FORTRAN, spread-sheet, data base, and wordprocessing software.
Kansas will implement, on the AT, many of the software tools currently available on the PRIMES. These will include ground-water models, a payroll backup, and numerous other applications. Coordination and exhange of software among the Districts having the AT will be maintained.
PROJECT TITLE: Automatic Data Recorder Applications - Kansas PROJECT NUMBER: KS-124 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: J. M. McNellis
Problem Applications resulting from using an Automatic Data Recorder (ADR) have been in the Survey program library for almost 20 years. These applications are currently processed via batch procedures in Reston. With state-of-the-art minicomputers, the potential for doing all the ADR processing on the local level is high. The expense of developing application software requires that the ADR programs be readily transportable.
Objectives This project produced computer programs, documentation,~ari3~procedu res on the ADR applications. All the ADR techniques from WATSTORE became transportable interactive programs written in FORTRAN 77 and were operational on the Harris minicomputer in Kansas.
66

Automatic data recorder applications - Kansas (KS-124) Continued
Approach -- Items pertaining to the ADR processing, with emphasis on program E659, were outlined. This outline was the basis for definition of functions, processes, and computation procedures that comprise the suite of ADR program modules. Documentation and a flow chart of each module and of the complete ADR process were developed as the FORTRAN 77 code developed. Coordination with the Automatic Data Section during the project was a continuing process.
PROJECT TITLE: Regional synthesis of the hydrogeology of the United States
PROJECT NUMBER: KS-137 COOPERATING AGENCY: Federal PROJECT CHIEF: J. S. Rosenshein
Problem A need exists for a comprehensive but succinct up-todate regional synthesis of the hydrology of the United States and adjacent areas. This need is being addressed by the preparation of a definitive volume on hydrogeology of North America. About one-half of this volume will concern the synthesizing of the hydrogeology of 28 ground-water regions of the United States and adjacent areas.
Objectives (1) To ensure that scientifically creditable and comprehensive treatment is given to the 28 ground-water regions of the United States and adjacent areas of North America. (2) To provide the coordination, organization, and guidance needed for preparation of the 28 chapters covering the ground-water regions. (3) To integrate the contributions of about 55 contributors to the regional synthesis part of the volume and to serve as editor for this part of the volume.
Approach Identify knowledgeable and qualified contributors for the chapters and assign responsibilities. Provide the broad guidelines and concepts for emphasis in preparation for the 28 chapters. Establish deadlines for outline and drafts. Coordinate preparation effort. Prepare personal contribution. Screen contributions for content. Provide review where needed. Provid final technical editing and integration of the contributions.
67

LIST OF REPORTS APPROVED FOR PUBLICATION OR RELEASED DURING 1983 AND 1984, KANSAS DISTRICT, U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
[Contact the District Office for information regarding the availability of these publications]
1. Baker, C. H., Jr., 1983, Evaluation of techniques for estimating ground-water withdrawals for irrigation in western Kansas: Kansas Water Office Bulletin 26, 14 p.
2. Barker, R. A., Dunlap, L. E., and Sauer, C. G., 1983, Analysis and computer simulation of stream-aquifer hydrology, Arkansas River valley, southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2200, 59 p.
3. Bevans, H. E., 1984, Hydrologic responses of streams to mining of the Mulberry Coal reserves in eastern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4047, 30 p.
4. Bevans, H. E., Skelton, John, Kenny, J. F., and Davis, J. V., 1984, Hydrology of Area 39, Western Region, Interior Coal Province, Kansas and Missouri: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-851, (in press).
5. Burnett, R. D., 1984, Predictive simulations of alternatives for managing the water resources of North Fork Solomon River valley between Kirwin Dam and Waconda Lake, north-central Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4249, 34 p.
6. Clement, R. W., 1983, Improvement of flood-frequency estimates for selected small watersheds in eastern Kansas using a rainfallrunoff model : U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4110, 22 p.
7. Combs, L. J., 1984, Water-resources reports prepared by or in cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey in Kansas, 1886-1983: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-609, 117 p.
8. Dunlap, L. E., Lindgren, R. J., and Carr, J. E., 1984, Projected effects of ground-water withdrawals in the Arkansas River valley, 1980-99, Hamilton and Kearny Counties, southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4082, 168 p.
9. Dunlap, L. E., Lindgren, R. J., and Sauer, C. G., 1983, Geohydrology and model analysis of stream-aquifer system along the Arkansas River in Kearny and Finney Counties, southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-222, 84 p.
10. Geiger, C. 0., Lacock, D. L., Shelton, L. R., Penny, M. L., and Merry, C. E., 1983, Water resources data, Kansas, water year 1982: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Data Report KS-82-1, 485 p.
68

11. ___1984, Water resources data, Kansas, water year 1983: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Data Report KS-83-1, 483 p.
12. Hart, R. J., and Stiles, T. C., 1984, Availability of natural and regulated streamflows for Instream uses during historical droughts, lower Neosho River, southeastern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4292, 42 p.
13. Jordan, P. R., 1983, Magnitude and frequency of low flows of unregulated streams in Kansas, and estimation of flow-duration curves for ungaged sites: Kansas Water Office Technical Report No. 17, 55 p.
14. ___1984, Magnitude and frequency of high flows of unregulated streams 1n Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-453 (pending publication as a Water-Supply Paper), 45 p.
15. Kenny, J. F., and Combs, L. J., 1983, Water-resources Investigations of the U.S. Geological Survey 1n Kansas fiscal years 1981 and 1982: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-932, 87 p.
16. Kenny, J. F., and McCauley, J. R., 1983, Application of remote-sensing techniques to hydrologic studies in selected coal-mined areas of southeastern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4007, 33 p.
17. Kume, Jack, 1984, Geohydrology and chemical quality of water in Middle and Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous rocks, western Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 844045, 54 p.
18. Kume, Jack, and Splnazola, J. M., 1983, Depth and thickness of selected units in Upper Permian, Upper Jurassic, and Lower Cretaceous rocks in southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4095, scale 1: 500,000, 7 sheets.
19. Leonard, R. B., Signer, D. C., Jorgensen, D. G., and Helgesen, J. 0., 1983, Geohydrology and hydrochemlstry of the Dakota aquifer, central United States: American Water Resources Association, Water Resources Bulletin, v. 19, no. 6, December 1983, p. 903-911.
20. Livingston, R. K., 1983, Lost gage-height record in Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Division Bulletin, May-December 1983, p. 52-59.
21. Livingston, R. K., and Medina, K. D., 1984, Water-data program of the U.S. Geological Survey 1n Kansas, fiscal year 1983: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4306, 33 P-
22. Marcher, M. V., Kenny, J. F., and others, 1983, Hydrology of Area 40, Western Region, Interior Coal Province, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Missouri: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-266, (1n press).
69

23. Medina, K. D., and Geiger, C. 0., 1984, Evaluation of the cost effectiveness of the 1983 stream-gaging program in Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4107, 57 p.
24. Pabst, M. E., 1983a, January 1983 water levels, and data related to water-level changes, western and south-central Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-762, 164 p.
25. ___1983b, Kansas ground-water observation-well network, 1983: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-528, 57 p.
26. Pabst, M. E., and Dague, B. J., 1984a, January 1984 water levels, and data related to water-level change in western and south-central Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-613, 162 p.
27. ___1984b, Percentage change in saturated thickness of the High Plains aquifer, west-central Kansas, 1950 to average 1982-84: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4357, scale 1: 125,000, 1 sheet.
28. Perry, C. A., 1984a, A method of estimating flood volumes in western Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4164, 18 p.
29. ___1984b, Natural ground-water-recharge data from three selected sites in Harvey County, south-central Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-457, 31 p.
30. Perry, C. A., and Hart, R. J., 1984, Flood-frequency estimates for five gaged basins in Wichita, Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4038, 23 p.
31. Pope, L. M., and Bevans, H. E., 1984, Relations of urban land-use and dry-weather, storm, and snowmelt flow characteristics to stream-water quality, Shunganunga Creek basin, Topeka, Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-750 (pending publication as a Water-Supply Paper), (in press).
32. Pope, L. M., Diaz, A. M., and Butler, M. K., 1983, Urban waterquality data and statistical summaries for selected sites in the Shunganunga Creek basin, Topeka, Kansas: Kansas Department of Health and Environment Bulletin B2-49, 203 p.
33. Rosenshein, J. S., and Bennett, G. D., editors, 1984, Groundwater hydraulics: American Geophysical Union, Water Resources Monograph 9, 407 p.
34. Sophocleous, Marios, and Perry, C. A., 1984, Experimental studies in natural groundwater recharge dynamics Assessment of recent advances in instrumentation: Journal of Hydrology, v. 70, p. 369-382.
70

35. Spinazola, J. M., and Dealy, M. T., 1983, Hydrology of the Ogallala aquifer in Ford County, southwestern Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4226, 58 p.
36. Spruill, T. B., 1983a, Relationship of nitrate concentrations to distance of well screen openings below casing water levels: American Water Resources Association, Water Resources Bulletin, v. 19, no. 6, December 1983, p. 977-981.
37. ___1983b, Statistical summaries of selected chemical constituents 1n Kansas ground-water supplies, 1976-81: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-263, 29 p.
38. ___1984a, Assessment of water resources 1n lead-zinc mined areas in Cherokee County, Kansas, and adjacent areas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-439, 102 p.
39. ___1984b, Use of data from regional ground-water-quality monitoring networks: 29th Annual Midwest Groundwater Conference, Proceedings, Lawrence, Kansas, October 1-4, 1984, p. 12.
40. Stullken, L. E., 1984, Hydrology of Prairie Dog Creek valley, Norton Dam to State line, north-central Kansas: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 84-4162, 49 p.

HYDROLOGIC-DATA STATIONS IN KANSAS, 1984 WATER YEAR
Explanation of Table Symbols Surface-Water Stations

Station Purpose, Complete-Record Gaging Stations

B - Benchmark. C - Current purpose station. F - Flood forecast (also used by National Weather Service).
H - A hydro!ogle station to meet objectives of defining regional streamflow characteristics.
I - Interstate Compact.
L - Long-term trend station or drought Index station. P - Principal-stream station to meet objectives of measuring principal
unregulated streams.
R - A station required for systems analysis of a regulated stream to meet objective of defining regulated flow.

Type of Gage, Complete-Record Gaging Station

B - Bubble gage
C - Cableway D - Digital recorder (stage) Dp - Digital recorder (precipitation)

R - Graphic recorder T - Telemetering equipment W - Artificial control

71

Sampling Purpose, Water-Quality Stations

CHEM METAL BIOL TOC RAD PEST SED BED COLI FIELD
OBS

Chemical analysis: cations, anions, nutrients Trace metals analysis Biological analysis: phytoplankton, periphyton
Total organic carbon determination Radiochemical analysis
Pesticide analysis Suspended sediment: concentration, discharge, particle size Bed material: particle size Coliform count: total, fecal, fecal streptococcal
Field measurements: discharge, water temperature, alkalinity, conductance, pH, dissolved oxygen Field observer collects samples for conductance, chloride, and
water temperature

Cooperator or Supporting Program

ARCA BENCHMARK
CBR DWR HAYS KC-CE KDHE KDOT
KWO MRB NASQAN
OFA T-CE USBR WICHITA

Arkansas River Compact Administration Hydrologic Benchmark Program (Federal)
Collection of Basic Records (Federal) Kansas State Board of Agriculture, Division of Water Resources City of Hays Kansas City District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Kansas Department of Health and Environment Kansas Department of Transportation
Kansas Water Office Missouri River Basin Program (Federal) National Stream-Quality Accounting Network (Federal)
Other Federal Agencies Tulsa District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Bureau of Reclamation City of Wichita

Ground-Water Wells

Well Numbers

Well numbers in these listings indicate the location of wells according to the land subdivisions of the U.S. Bureau of Land Management (fig. 10).
An example of a typical well number is 12S 06E 06BCAC in Geary County. The
first two digits indicate the township, which in Kansas are nearly all south of the 40th parallel base line. The second two digits indicate the range east or west of the Sixth Principal Meridian. The last two digits indicate
the section in which the well is located. The first letter after those digits denotes the quarter section or 160-acre tract; the second, the
quarter-quarter section or 40-acre tract; the third, the quarter-quarterquarter section or 10-acre tract; and the fourth, when used, the quarterquarter-quarter-quarter section or 2 1/2-acre tract. The quarter sections, quarter-quarter sections, and so forth, are designated A^, B, C_, and £ in a counterclockwise direction, beginning with A in the nortFTeast quadrant. If two or more wells are located within the smallest subdivision indicated, the wells are numbered serially.

72

Water-level Notes

A - Annual observation Q - Quarterly observation

M - Monthly observation R - Continuous recorder

12S 06E 06BCAC

/1 7/1 6/1 5/1 4/1 3
10/21/22/23/24, )
323334/3536

/ CEARY COUNTY

R.6E.

flTzE. R/8E. /

Figure 10. Well-numbering system, 73

Table 1. Complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year

I dent, no.

Station name

Station Location Type Coop, purpose Sec. T. R. of or
gage support

Missouri River Basin

06-

8140 Turkey Cr. nr Seneca

C,F,L,P 20 IS 12E BDR KWO

8447 S. Fk. Sappa Cr. nr Brewster H,L

9 9S 37W BDRDp KWO

8449 S. Fk. Sappa Cr. nr Achilles H,L

29 4S 30W BDRDp KWO

8465 Beaver Cr. at Cedar Bluffs C,I,L,P 10 IS 29W BDR CBR

8479 Prairie Dog Cr. ab Keith

C,L,P 23 3S 25W BCDRDpW KC-CE

Sebelius Lake

84795 Keith Sebelius Lake nr Norton 8480 Prairie Dog Cr. at Norton C,R 8485 Prairie Dog Cr. nr Woodruff C,I,L,R 8535 Republican R. nr Hardy, Nebr. C,I,R 8538 White Rock Cr. nr Burr Oak C,L,P

8 3S 23W BR

KWO

9 3S 23W BDRW KWO

9 IS 19W BDR CBR

6 IS 5W BDRT CBR

7 2S 8W BCDRW KC-CE

8539 Lovewell Res. nr Lovewell
8540 White Rock Cr. at Lovewell C,R 8558 Buffalo Cr. nr Jamestown C,F 8560 Republican R. at Concordia C,R 8566 Republican R. at Clay Center C,R

85705 Mil ford Lake nr Junction City

8571 Republican R. bl Mil ford Dam C,R

8585 N. Fk. Smoky Hill R. nr

F,P

McAll aster

8600 Smoky Hill R. at Elkader C,L,P

8610 Smoky Hill R. nr Arnold

C,P

6 2S 17 2S 14 5S 28 5S 17 8S
20 us
17 12S
34 14S 29 14S

6W BR 6W BDRW 5W BDR 3W BDRT 3E BDRT
5E RT BCDRT
36W BDRDp
32W BDRDp 24W BDR

KWO KWO KWO KC-CE CBR
KC-CE KC-CE KWO
KWO KC-CE

8615 Cedar Bluff Res. nr Ell is 8620 Smoky Hill R. at Cedar Bluff
Dam
8627 Smoky Hill R. nr Schoenchen 86285 Smoky Hill R. bl Schoenchen
8635 Big Cr. nr Hays

C,R
C.F.R C,R C.F.L

36 14S 1 15S
25 15S 27 15S 30 14S

22W BR 22W BCRTW
19W BDR 18W BDR 17W BDR

KWO KWO
KWO HAYS KWO

8639 N. Fk. Big Cr. nr Victoria
86405 Smoky Hill R. nr Bunker Hill 8645 Smoky Hill R. at Ellsworth 8650 Kanopolis Lake nr Kanopolis 8655 Smoky Hill R. nr Langley

C,L C,R C,R
C,R

27 13S 33 14S 20 15S 3 17S 35 16S

17W BR 13W BDR 8W BDR 6W BR 6W BDRT

KWO
KC-CE KC-CE KC-CE
KC-CE

8665 Smoky Hill R. nr Mentor 8669 Saline R. nr WaKeeney
8670 Saline R. nr Russell 8681 Wilson Lake nr Wilson 8682 Saline R. at Wilson Dam

C,R H,P C.F.L
C,R

29 14S 2W BDRT 10 US 23W BDR 34 12S 14W BDR 36 12S 11W RT 25 12S 11W BDRT

KC-CE KWO
KWO KC-CE KC-CE

74

Table 1. Complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water yearContinued

Ident. no.

Station name

Station purpose

06-
8695 8702 8710 8715 8717

Saline R. at Tescott Smoky Hill R. at New Cambria
N. Fk. Solomon R. at Glade
Bow Cr. nr Stockton Kirwin Res. at Klrwin

c, c, c,

F,R R P

c, F,L

8718 N. Fk. Solomon R. at K1rw1n 8725 N. Fk. Solomon R. at Portls

c, c,

R R

8730 S. Fk. Solomon R. ab Webster c,P

Res.

8731 Webster Res. nr Stockton
8732 S. Fk. Solomon R. bl Webster c, R

Res.

87346 S. Fk. Solomon R. at Woodston c, R

8740 S. Fk. Solomon R. at Osborne c, F,R

8742 Waconda Lake at Glen Elder

8759 Solomon R. nr Glen Elder c, F,R

8767 Salt Cr. nr Ada

c, F

8769 Solomon R. at N1les 8776 Smoky H111 R. at Enterprise 8780 Chapman Cr. nr Chapman
8791 Kansas R. at Ft. Riley
87965 Kings Cr. nr Manhattan

cc,,

R R

F, L
c, R

B

8842 Mill Cr. at Washington 8844 Little Blue R. nr Barnes 8855 Black VermUl ion R. nr
Frankfort 8869 Tuttle Creek Lake nr
Manhattan 8870 Big Blue R. nr Manhattan
8875 Kansas R. at Wamego 88835 Kansas R. nr Belvue 8885 Mill Cr. nr Paxico 8890 Kansas R. at Topeka 8891 Soldier Cr. nr Goff
88912 Soldier Cr. nr Bancroft 88914 Soldier Cr. nr Soldier 88916 Soldier Cr. nr Circleville 8892 Soldier Cr. nr Delia 8895 Soldier Cr. nr Topeka

F, H

cc,,

P P

c, R

c, R

cC, c, c

F,L R ,H

c ,H

c c

,H ,H

c ,H

c ,P

75

Location Type Coop .
Sec. T. k. of or
gage support

16 12S 5W BDRT
1 14S 2W BDR 25 4S 18W BDR 1 6S 18W BDR 33 4S 16W BR
33 4S 16W R 5 6S 12W BDR 8 8S 20W BDR
27 7S 19W BR 26 7S 19W BCDR

KWO MRB KC-CE KWO KWO
KWO KC-CE KC-CE
KWO KWO

16 7S 16W BDR MRB

20 7S 12W BDR KWO

27 6S 9W BR

USBR

2 7S 9W BCDRW KWO

36 10S 5W BDR KWO

31 12S 1W BDRT KC-CE 20 13S 3E BDRT KC-CE 1 12S 3E BDR KWO 33 11S 6E BDRT KC-CE 18 11S 8E BCDRDp CBR

1 3S 3E BDR
22 3S 5E BDR 20 4S 9E BDR

KWO KC-CE KC-CE

24 9S 7E BR

KC-CE

30 9S 8E BDRT KC-CE

9 10S 10E BDRT KC-CE 13 10S HE BDRT DWR 27 11S 11E BDRT KWO 28 11S 16E BDRT KC-CE 16 5S 13E BDRDp KWO

28 5S 13E BDRDp KWO 4 6S 13E BDRDp KWO 10 7S 13E BDRDp KWO 8 10S 14E BDR KWO 14 11S 15E BDR KC-CE

Table 1. Complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water yearContinued

Ident. no.

Station name

Station purpose

06-
8901 Delaware R. nr Muscotah 890898 Perry Lake nr Perry 8909 Delaware R. bl Perry Dam 8910 Kansas R. at Lecompton 891478 Clinton Lake nr Lawrence

C ,L C ,R C ,R

8915 Wakarusa R. nr Lawrence

C ,R

8920 Stranger Cr. nr Tonganoxie C ,L

89235 Kansas R. at DeSoto

C ,F,R

89308 Blue R. nr Stanley

C ,H

8933 Indian Cr. at Overland Park C ,H

89335 Tomahawk Cr. nr Overland Park C ,H

9108 Marais des Cygnes R. nr

C ,P

Reading

910997 Melvern Lake nr Melvern

9115 Salt Cr. nr Lyndon

C ,F,L

9119 Dragoon Cr. nr Burlingame C ,H

91249 9125
9130
9135
9140

Pomona Lake nr Quenemo Hundred and Ten Mile Cr. nr
Quenemo
Marais des Cygnes R. nr Pomona
Marais des Cygnes R. nr
Ottawa Pottawatomie Cr. nr Garnett

C ,R C ,R C ,R
C ,F,L

914995 Hillsdale Lake nr Hillsdale

9150 Big Bull Cr. nr Hillsdale C ,R

9166 Marais des Cygnes R. nr

C ,F,R

Kansas-Missouri State Line

9170 Little Osage R. at Fulton C,,F,L

91738 Marmaton R. nr Marmaton

c ,F,L

Location Type Coop,
Sec. T. R. of or gage support

16 6S 17E BDRT KC-CE

9 11S 18E R

KC-CE

9 11S 18E CR KC-CE

35 11S 18E BDRT KC-CE

8 13S 19E BR KC-CE

23 13S 19E BDRT KC-CE 7 11S 22E BDRT KC-CE 28 12S 22E BDRT KWO/
KC-CE 19 14S 25E BDR KWO 6 13S 25E BDR KWO

21 13S 25E BDR KWO 15 17S 13E BDR KC-CE

1 18S 15E R 34 16S 16E BDR 27 15S 14E BDR

KC-CE KWO KC-CE

19 16S 17E R

KC-CE

20 16S 17E BCDRT KC-CE

7 17S 18E BDRT KC-CE

36 16S 19E BDRT KC-CE

6 20S 20E BDR KWO

17 16S 23E BR KC-CE 20 16S 23E BCDR KC-CE 16 21S 25E BDRT KWO

25 23S 24E BDRT KWO 4 26S 24E BCDR KC-CE

07-
1370 1375 1380 13865 1395

Arkansas River Basin

Frontier Ditch nr Coolidge Arkansas R. nr Syracuse
Arkansas R. at Syracuse Whitewoman Cr. nr Leoti
Arkansas R. at Dodge City

C ,1 C,,I,R
C ,F,R C,»H C,,R

21 26 18 23 35

76

23S 43W BDRTW CBR 23S 43W BDRT CBR 24S 40W BDRDpT KWO 18S 38W BRDp KWO 26S 25W BDRT T-CE/
CBR

Table 1. Complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year Continued

Ident. no.

Station name

Station purpose

Location Type Coop, Sec. T. R. of or
gage support

07-
1398 1400 14085 1412 1413

Mulberry Cr. nr Dodge City Arkansas R. nr Kinsley Pawnee R. nr Burdett
Pawnee R. nr Larned Arkansas R. at Great Bend

C,H,L,P 24 28S 25W BDR KWO C,R 26 24S 19W BDRT T-CE H,L,P 21 21S 21W BDR KWO
C,F,L,P 30 21S 18W BDRW KWO C,R 33 19S 13W BDRT T-CE

14178 Walnut Cr. nr Rush Center C,H,P

1419 Walnut Cr. at Albert

C,L,P

1423 Rattlesnake Cr. nr Macksville H,P

142575 Rattlesnake Cr. nr Zenith H,P

14262 Rattlesnake Cr. nr Raymond H,P

24 18S 19W BDR 29 18S 15W R 16 25S 14W BDR
26 22S 11W BDR 15 21S 10W BDR

KWO KWO KWO KWO KWO

1433 Cow Creek nr Lyons

C,F,L,R 15 20S 8W BDRT KWO

14333 Arkansas R. nr Hutchinson C,F,R 21 24S 4W BDR KWO

143665 Little Ark. R. at Alta Mills H,P

30 22S 2W BDR KWO

1442 Little Ark. R. Floodway at

34 25S 1W BR WICH-

Valley Center

ITA

1442 Little Ark. R. at Valley

C,L

36 25S 1W BDR KWO

Center (main stem)

1443
1443
14455 14478
14479

Arkansas R. Floodway at
Wichita Arkansas R. at Wichita
(main stem)
Arkansas R. at Derby N. Fk. Ninnescah R. ab
Cheney Reservoir Cheney Reservoir nr Cheney

C,F,P
C,P C,P

11 27S 1W BR WICHITA
5 28S IE BDRT KWO
12 29S IE BDRT T-CE 25 25S 6W BDR WICH-
ITA 6 27S 4W BR WICH-
ITA

144795 N. Fk. Ninnescah R. at Cheney Dam
14491 S. Fk. Ninnescah R. nr Pratt
1452 S. Fk. Ninnescah R. nr Murdock
1455 Ninnescah R. nr Peck
1457 Slate Creek at Wellington

C,R
H,P C,F,L
C,R H,P

6 27S 4W DW
2 28S 13W BDR 34 28S 5W BDR

WICHITA
KWO
KWO

10 SOS 1W BDRT T-CE 23 32S 1W BDR KWO

1465 Arkansas R. at Arkansas City
146622 El Dorado Lake nr El Dorado 146623 Walnut R. bl El Dorado Lake 14683 Walnut R. at Hwy. 54 east
of El Dorado 146895 Walnut R. at Augusta

C,L,P
C,R C,R
C,R

35 34S 3E BDRT CBR

30 25S 6E RT T-CE

25 25S 5E

T-CE

1 26S 5E BDRT T-CE

27 27S 4E BDRT T-CE

77

Table 1.--Complete-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water yearContinued

Ident. no.

Station name

Station

Location Type Coop,

purpose Sec . T. R. of or

gage support

07-
14707 1478 1490 1515 15559

Whitewater R. at Towanda
Walnut R. at Winfield Medicine Lodge R. nr Kiowa Chikaskia R. nr Corbin
Cimarron R. nr Elkhart

C.F.P C.L L,P F.P
H

8 26S 4E BDRT KWO 33 32S 4E BDRT T-CE 36 34S 11W BDR KWO 36 33S 3W BDR KWO
4 34S 42W BDR KWO

15601
1561 15622 1575 1659

N. Fk. Cimarron R. at
Richfield Sand Arroyo Cr. nr Johnson Bear Cr. nr Johnson
Crooked Cr. nr Nye Toronto Lake nr Toronto

H
H H F,L

16 32S 41W BR KWO

25 29S 41W BDRDp KWO

12 28S 41W BDR KWO

1 35S 27W BDR KWO

36 26S 13E R

T-CE

1660 Verdigris R. nr Coyville C,R

1665 Verdigris R. nr Altoona

C,R

1675 Otter Cr. at Climax

H.L

1680 Fall River Lake nr Fall River

1685 Fall R. nr Fall River

C,R

8 27S 14E DR T-CE 29 29S 16E BDRT T-CE 8 27S HE BDR KWO 3 28S 12E BR T-CE 2 28S 12E DRT T-CE

1695 Fall R. at Fredonia

C,R

1698 Elk R. at Elk Falls

C,H

17005 Elk City Lake nr Independence

17006 Elk R. bl Elk City Lake

C,R

1705 Verdigris R. at Independence C,R

24 29S 14E BDRT T-CE 3 31S HE BDR KWO 9 32S 15E BR T-CE 9 32S 15E BDR T-CE 32 32S 16E BDRT T-CE

170695 Big Hill Lake nr Cherryvale 1707 Big Hill Cr. nr Cherryvale
1720 Caney R. nr Elgin
1794 Council Grove Lake nr
Council Grove 1795 Neosho R. at Council Grove

C,H C.L
C,R

7 32S 18E BR T-CE 7 32S 18E BDRT T-CE 16 35S 10E BDR KWO 10 16S 8E BR T-CE
14 16S 8E DR T-CE

17973 Neosho R. nr Americus 179794 Marion Lake nr Marion
179795 Cottonwood R. bl Marion Lake 1804 Cottonwood R. nr Florence 1805 Cedar Cr. nr Cedar Point

C,R
C,R C,R C.L

24 18S 10E BDRT T-CE 27 19S 3E BR T-CE 27 19S 3E BCDR T-CE 10 21S 5E BDRT T-CE 25 21S 5E DR KWO

18225 18245
18251 1830 1835

Cottonwood R. nr Plymouth John Redmond Res. nr
Burlington Neosho R. at Burlington Neosho R. nr Tola
Neosho R. nr Parsons

C,R 13 9
C,R 26 C.L.R 9 C,F,L,R 33

19S 9E BDRT T-CE 21S 15E BRT T-CE
21S 15E BDRT T-CE 25S 18E BCDRT T-CE 31S 21E BDRTW KWO

1840 Lightning Cr. nr McCune

H.L.P

32S 22E BDR KWO

78

Table 2. Partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water year High Flow

Ident. no.

Station name

Location Sec. T7

Coop or support

Missouri River Basin

068137 8157 81826 8448
8451

Tennessee Cr. trib. nr Seneca Buttermilk Cr. nr Willis
White Clay Cr. at Atchison S. Fk. Sappa Cr. trib. nr
Goodland
Long Branch Draw nr Norcatur

2 30
1 36
6

3S 3S 6S 8S
2S

8460 Beaver Cr. at Ludell

30

8462 Beaver Cr. trib. nr Ludell

2

8476 Prairie Dog Cr. trib. at Col by 6

8482 Prairie Dog Cr. trib. nr

26

Norton

8561 West Cr. nr Talmo

36

2S 3S 8S 2S
4S

85632 Elk Cr. at Clyde 8568 Moll Cr. nr Green 8605 Hackberry Cr. nr Gove
8630 Smoky Hill R. at Pfeifer 8634 Big Cr. trib. nr Ogallah

26 5S 8 8S 1 13S
30 15S 11 13S

8637 8643
8647 86649 8668

Big Cr. trib. nr Hays Smoky Hill R. trib. at
Dorrance
Spring Cr. nr Kanopolis Dry Cr. at Mentor Saline R. trib. at Collyer

7 14S 12 14S
24 15S 24 15S 32 11S

8683 Coon Cr. trib. nr Luray

19 10S

8684 Wolf Cr. nr Lucas

33 11S

8689 Bullfoot Cr. trib. nr Lincoln 30 12S

86995 Mulberry Cr. nr Salina

9 14S

8703 Gypsum Cr. nr Gypsum

15 16S

8726 Oak Cr. at Bellaire 8733 Ash Cr. trib. nr Stockton
8745 East Limestone Cr. nr Ionia 8758 Limestone Cr. nr Glen Elder 87712 Mud Cr. at Abilene

15 3S 18 7S
21 4S 15 6S 17 13S

12E 18E 20E 39W
25W
32W 32W 33W 23W
3W
1W 4E 29W 16W 22W
17W 12W
8W 3W 25W
12W 11W 7W 3W 1W
12W 18W 9W 9W 2E

KDOT KDOT KC-CE KDOT
KDOT
KWO KDOT KDOT KDOT
KDOT
KC-CE KDOT KWO KC-CE KDOT
KDOT KDOT
KDOT KC-CE KDOT
KDOT KWO KDOT KC-CE KWO
KDOT KDOT KDOT KWO KC-CE

79

Table 2. Partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water yearContinued

Ident. no.

Station name

Location Sec. T. R.

Coop or
support

06-
8775 Turkey Cr. nr AbHene 8792 Clark Cr. nr Junction City 879815 Wildcat Cr. at Manhattan 8841 Mulberry Cr. trlb. nr Haddam 8843 Mill Cr. trib. nr Washington

26 14S 14 12S
14 10S 10 3S 5 3S

2E 6E
7E IE 4E

8849 88549
8865 8872 8876

Robidoux Cr. at Seattle Black VermilHon R. at
Frankfort (Hwy 99) Fancy Cr. at Winkler Cedar Cr. nr Manhattan
Kansas R. trib. nr Wamego

20 2S 9E 16 4S 9E
2 7S 5E 19 9S 8E 14 10S 10E

8880 88803 8883 8889
88955

Vermill ion Cr. nr Wamego
Vermill 1on Cr. nr Louisville Rock Cr. nr Louisville Blacksmith Cr. trib. nr
Valencia Indian Cr. nr Topeka

20 8S HE 12 9S 10E 14 9S 9E 11 12S 14E
5 us 16E

88963 Shunganunga Cr. at Topeka

6 12S 16E

89105 Stone House Cr. at Williamstown 30 US 19E

89165 Nai smith Cr. at Lawrence

12 13S 19E

89185 Stranger Cr. at Easton

19 8S 21E

8928 Turkey Cr. at Merrlam

13 12S 24E

89294 Turkey Cr. at Kansas City

27 us 25E

9123 Dragoon Cr. trib. nr Lyndon 6 16S 16E

9137 Middle Cr. nr Princeton

13 18S 19E

91425 S. Fk. Pottawatomie Cr. trib. 7 21S 20E

nr Garnett

9145 Pottawatomie Cr. at Lane

34 18S 21E

9151 Big Bull Cr. at Paola

17 17S 23E

9167 Middle Cr. nr Kincaid

11 23S 20E

9171 Marmaton R. nr Bronson

3 25S 21E

9174 Marmaton R. trib. nr Fort Scott 9 26S 24E

KWO KWO KWO KDOT KDOT
KDOT KC-CE
KWO KDOT KDOT
KC-CE KC-CE KWO KDOT
KC-CE
KC-CE KDOT KWO KC-CE KWO
KWO KDOT KDOT KDOT
KC-CE
KC-CE KDOT KDOT KDOT

80

Table 2. Partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water yearContinued

Ident, no.

Station name

Location Sec. T. R7

Coop or support

071386
1390 1397 1403 1406

Arkansas River Basin

White Woman Cr. trib. nr

34

Selkirk

Arkansas R. at Garden City 19

Arkansas R. trib. nr Dodge City 11

Whitewoman Cr. nr Bellefont 33

Pawnee R. trib. nr Kalvesta 12

17S
24S 27S 24S 23S

1416 Long Branch Cr. nr Ness City 1418 Otter Cr. nr Rush Center
1421 Rattlesnake Cr. trib. nr Mullinville
1427 Salt Cr. nr Partridge 14286 Cow Cr. nr Claflin

32 18S 15 19S 20 28S
22 23S 6 18S

1429 Blood Cr. nr Boyd

34 17S

1431 Cheyenne Cr. trib. nr Claflin 28 18S

1436 Little Arkansas R. nr Little 8 19S

River

1449 S. Fk. Ninnescah R. trib. nr 27 27S

Pratt

1453 Clear Cr. nr Garden Plain

33 27S

1458 Antelope Cr. trib. nr Dalton 11

14702 Whitewater R. trib. nr Towanda 26

14799 Cedar Cr. trib. nr Cambridge 26

1481 Grouse Cr. nr Dexter

31

1516 Rush Cr. nr Harper

21

32S 25S
31S 32S 32S

1559 N. Fk. Cimarron R. trib. nr Elkhart
1566 Cimarron R. trib. nr Moscow 1567 Cimarron R. trib. nr Satanta 1571 Crooked Cr. nr Copeland
1574 Crooked Cr. trib. at Meade

9 33S
20 31S 17 32S 36 28S 2 32S

1577 Kiger Cr. nr Ashland 1579 Cavalry Cr. at Coldwater 1662 Sandy Cr. nr Yates Center 1708 Mud Cr. nr Mound Valley
1717 Spring Branch nr Cedar Vale

3 33S 14 32S 26 25S 9 33S 7 34S

39W
32W 25W 21W 28W
23W 18W 19W
7W 11W
14W 11W 6W
13W
3W
IE 3E 7E 7E 7W
42W
34W 33W 30W 28W
24W 19W 14E 18E 9E

KDOT
KWO KDOT KDOT KDOT
KDOT KDOT KDOT
KDOT KWO
KWO KDOT KWO
KDOT
KDOT
KDOT KDOT KDOT KWO KDOT
KDOT
KDOT KDOT KDOT KDOT
KDOT KWO KDOT KDOT KDOT

81

Table 2. Partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water yearContinued

Ident. no.

Station name

Location Sec. T. R.

Coop or
support

07-
1718 1803 1815 1826 1838 1845

Cedar Cr. trib. nr Hooser Spring Cr. trib. nr Florence
Middle Cr. nr Elmdale N. Big Cr. nr Burlington Limestone Cr. nr Beulah
Labette Cr. nr Oswego

7 34S 8E 32 2 IS 5E
13 19S 6E 27 22S 15E 28 30S 23E 11 33S 20E

KDOT KDOT KWO KDOT KDOT
KWO

068703
071390

Flood Hydrograph Missouri River Basin

Gypsum Cr. nr Gypsum

15 16S

Arkansas River Basin

Arkansas R. at Garden City 19 24S

1W 32W

KWO KWO

Rating Forecast

Missouri River Basin

06-
8884 Kansas R. at Maple Hill 89185 Stranger Cr. at Easton

1 US 19 8S

12E 21E

KC-CE KC-CE

Low Flow

Arkansas River Basin

07-

14257 Rattlesnake Cr. ab. Little

31 22S

Salt Marsh nr Hudson

14265 Peace Cr. nr Sylvia

4 23S

14267 Peace Cr. nr Sterling

7 22S

14274 Salt Cr. nr Hutchinson

1 23S

14459 N. Fk. Ninnescah R. nr Sylvia 27 24S

11W
10W 8W 7W 10W

KWO
KWO KWO KWO KWO

82

Table 2. Partial-record surface-water gaging stations, 1984 water yearContinued

Ident. no.

Station name

Location Sec. T. R.

Coop or
support

07-

14462 N. Fk. Ninnescah R. ab Silver 25 25S 8W

Cr. nr Arlington

14464 Silver Cr. nr Landon

8 26S 9W

14489 S. Fk. Ninnescah R. at Pratt 3 28S 13W

14513 S. Fk. Ninnescah R. nr Callsta 1 27S 9W

KWO
KWO KWO KWO

Continuous Stage

Missouri River Basin

06-
8785 87982 8847 89295 9114

Lyon Cr. nr Woodbine Kansas R. at Manhattan
Big Blue R. nr Blue Rapids Kansas R. at Kansas City Marals des Cygnes R. at
Quenemo

31 13S 27 10S
21 4S 14 US 22 17S

5E 8E
7E 25E 17E

KC-CE KC-CE
KC-CE KC-CE KC-CE

Arkansas River Basin

071832 Neosho R. nr Chanute

27S 18E

T-CE

83

Table 3. Precipitation-record gaging stations, 1984 water year

I dent, no.

Station name

Location Sec. T. R.

Coop or
support

06-
8447 8449 84568 8460 8479

Missouri River Basin

S. Fk. Sappa Cr. nr Brewster S. Fk. Sappa Cr. nr Achilles
Little Beaver Cr. nr Good! and Beaver Cr. at Ludell Prairie Dog Cr. ab Keith Sebelius
Lake

9 29 28 30
23

9S 4S
5S 2S 3S

8585 N. Fk. Smoky Hill R. nr McAllaster 17

8600 Smoky Hill R. at Elkader

34

8605 Hackberry Cr. nr Gove

1

8668 Saline R. trib. at Collyer

32

87965 Kings Cr. nr Manhattan

18

12S 14S 13S US 11S

8891 Soldier Cr. nr Goff
88912 Soldier Cr. nr Bancroft 88914 Soldier Cr. nr Soldier 88916 Soldier Cr. nr Circleville 01450700 Ladder Cr. nr Tribune

16 5S 28 5S 4 6S 10 7S 5 16S

07-
1380 1386 13865 1388 1406

Arkansas River Basin

Arkansas R. nr Syracuse White Woman Cr. trib. nr Selkirk
White Woman Cr. nr Leoti Lion Cr. trib. nr Modoc
Pawnee R. trib. nr Kal vesta

18 34
23 22 12

24S 17S
18S 18S 23S

1414 S. Fk. Walnut Cr. trib. nr Dighton 1416 Long Branch Cr. nr Ness City
144325 Gypsum Cr. at Oliver St., Wichita 14434 Dry Cr. at Pawnee Ave., Wichita 144494 Cowskin Cr. trib. at Westfield
Drive, Wichita

16 32
2 2 20

18S 18S 28S 28S 27S

1561 Sand Arroyo Cr. nr Johnson
15625 Bear Cr. nr Big Bow 1571 Crooked Cr. nr Cope! and 011603 James Draw nr Lakin
012222 Cimarron R. trib. nr Hugoton

25 29S 14 27S 36 28S 10 22S 17 33S

002822 Gray Co. landfill nr Ingalls 010518 Playa Lake nr Satanta

10 26S 19 28S

37W 30W 39W 32W 25W
36W 32W 29W 25W 8E
13E 13E 13E 13E 40W
40W 39W 38W 34W 28W
28W 23W IE
IE 1W
41W 39W 30W 36W 37W
29W 34W

KWO KWO KWO KWO KWO
KWO KWO KWO KWO CBR
KWO KWO KWO KWO KWO
KWO KWO KWO KWO KWO
KWO KWO WICHITA WICHITA WICHITA
KWO KWO KWO KWO KWO
KWO KWO

84

Table 4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year

County Alien Barber
Barton Bourbon Cherokee Cheyenne
Clark Clay
Cloud Comanche Crawford
Decatur
Douglas

Well number
24S 18E 28CDD
31S 15W 19BDB 32S 11W 30BBA 32S 12W 04DBC 33S 11W 28CBB 34S 15W 17ADA
35S 15W 11CB
18S 15W 28CCC3
25S 24E 36AAC
34S 25E 13BAC
03S 37W 19BBC 03S 39W 32BDB 05S 38W 22ACB 05S 40W 14BCD 05S 42W 14CBC
30S 23W 06AAA 33S 22W 30CBC
06S 01E 02BCD 06S 02E 29DAC 08S 02E 02CCA
05S 02W 01BAC
31S 18W 19ACB
29S 23E 24DBA 30S 24E 19ADD
01S 29W 19BDD 02S 30W 26DCC 03S 29W 12BBA 04S 26W 08DDD
12S 19E 13ADA 12S 20E 07CBC 12S 20E 17CCB 15S 19E 15AAD

Waterlevel notes
Q
A Q Q Q A
A
Q
Q
Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q
Q
Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q R Q

County Edwards
Ell 1s Ellsworth
Flnney

Well number
23S 19W 22CCC
24S 17W 24DDD 24S 18W 36DDC 24S 19W 34ADD 25S 16W 31DCC
25S 18W 09AAA 25S 18W 33CDC 26S 19W 12ABB2
14S 18W 12AAD 14S 18W 12ABB
17S 09W 20BCD 17S 09W 21BCC 17S 09W 21BCC2 17S 09W 28CBB 17S 09W 28CBB2
17S 09W 31AAB 17S 09W 31AAB2 17S 09W 31ADC
21S 32W 20CBD
21S 34W 14DBB 22S 27W 14ADC 22S 33W 22BAA 22S 33W 36AAA2
22S 34W 26ADD 23S 27W 12CCC 23S 33W 17BBB 23S 33W 28CDC 23S 34W 21DDC
24S 31W 27CCB 24S 32W 03DAC 24S 33W 09CCD 24S 33W 09CCD2 24S 33W 22BCC
24S 33W 22DCA 24S 33W 28DAA 25S 32W 31DD 25S 33W 03BCC 25S 33W 05ABD

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q R
Q Q R R Q
Q Q Q Q Q

85

Table 4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year Continued

County

Well number

Finney (continued)

255 33W 09ABD 25S 33W 15DAC 25S 33W 16DCC
25S 33W 17DBD 255 33W 35DBD

255 34W 06AAA 25S 34W 10ABB 255 34W 34DBD
265 33W 26ABB

Ford 25S 22W 20AAA 255 22W 27CCD 25S 23W 11CCC 255 23W 12BBB 255 23W 14ADD

26S 21W 17DBC 26S 21W 23ADA 26S 23W 10DAD 265 24W 29DDD 265 24W 31DDA

26S 24W 32CBA 265 24W 32DDA 265 24W 33CDA 26S 25W 34BBB 26S 26W 32DCC

275 23W 24BCB 27S 24W 03BBD 27S 24W 03CDD 27S 24W 04BBC 27S 24W 09AAD

27S 24W 16BDB 28S 24W 08DCC 28S 25W 06ABB 28S 26W 13CAA 295 21W 05BBB 295 26W 29ABB

Geary

US 06E 27CBB

Gove 11S 26W 04CDC US 27W 36BCC US 29W 04DAD US 30W 27ABB

Water-
level notes

County

Q Graham
Q Q Q Grant
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Gra*
Q
Q Q R
Q M
Q
Q Greeley
Q Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q
86

Well number
65 24W 28BAB 6S 24W 35DDD 6S 25W 28CBC
27S 35W 17ADD 27S 37W 04ABB 27S 38W 15BBB 27S 38W 23CB 275 38W 32BCC
285 36W 21CDD 28S 37W 02BBB3 28S 38W 07BBB 28S 38W 12DDD 28S 38W 17AAA
29S 35W 06BAA 295 35W 07CBD 29S 38W 35CCD 305 36W 01BBB 305 36W 32BBC
30S 37W 03DBA 305 37W 20CBC
245 28W 36ACA 24S 30W 15CCC 26S 29W 35CCC 275 27W 25CCD 27S 30W 23BB
28S 30W 17BBA 28S 30W 24BAB 295 28W 28CDC 295 29W 10ABB
165 39W 02BDC 165 39W 22DCB 16S 40W 18DBA 16S 41W 20BAD 17S 39W 02BAA
17S 39W 22ABB 175 40W 15CCB 175 40W 31BBA 175 42W 27CBB

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q R
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q

Table 4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year Continued

County Hami 1 ton Harvey Haskell
Hodgeman
Jackson

Well number
24S 40W 17BBB 26S 42W 17CB 26S 42W 22CDB
24S 02W 16BAA
27S 33W 29DAA 27S 34W 16DDD 28S 32W 18BBB 28S 32W 24BCC 28S 33W 21BCB
28S 34W 15DAB 29S 32W 26CBB2 29S 33W 28BCB 30S 32W 11BBB 30S 32W 31BAB 30S 33W 30CBD
30S 34W 05BBB 30S 34W 30ADD2
21S 22W 12BCB 22S 22W 13CCC 22S 23W 31ADD 22S 24W 14BBC 22S 24W 16ADB2
22S 24W 24DDD 22S 24W 25DDC 225 24W 26DDA 22S 24W 35DAC 23S 22W 07DAA
23S 23W 04AAD 23S 23W 04DCA 23S 23W 12ABD 23S 24W 11DAA 23S 25W 22DBB 23S 26W 07CCC
06S 15E 27BAB

Waterlevel notes County
Q Jefferson Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Johnson Q Q
A Q Kearny
Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Klngman
Q
* K1owa A Q Q
Q A * Labette
Q Lane
Q

Well number
US 16E 25CBA US 17E 21ADA US 17E 27BBC US 18E 08DAC US 19E 27BCC
11S 19E 29CCA
US 23E 33BDD 12S 22E 21CCC 12S 22E 25BCCB 12S 22E 29BBD
23S 35W 12CCC 23S 37W 04ABC 24S 35W 13CCC2 25S 35W 02BAA 25S 35W 17AAA
25S 35W 26BAB 25S 36W 28BBD 25S 37W 15ABA2 26S 36W 04BDA
27S 10W 03DDD 28S 07W 29CDD 30S 05W 12CCA
27S 17W 21ADC 27S 18W 13AAA 27S 18W 18DDC 27S 20W 26ABD 28S 19W 10AAC
29S 18W 02ACC
31S 21E 15CCC2
17S 28W 26ABB 17S 30W 13CBB 18S 27W 13CCC 18S 30W 02AAA

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q
Q
Q Q Q Q

87

Table 4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year Continued

County

Well number

Leavenworth 12S 22E 21BCD 12S 22E 22CAA

Logan

US 32W 04ACD US 32W 19AAB US 36W 06ADD2

McPherson

17S 03W 04BBB 17S 04W 25DDD 17S 05W 07CBB 17S 05W 22BAA

Meade

30S 27W 22CDD 30S 27W 32DDD 30S 30W 28ABB 32S 28W 04ADD
33S 28W 29BCB

33S 30W 35CB

Norton

31S 39W 33BCC 31S 40W 29ABB 31S 43W 14DDC 32S 42W 21BCC 33S 40W 27CCC

33S 41W 03AAD 35S 40W 03BBB

Ness 18S 21W 31CAA 19S 23W 01CCB
19S 23W 08CBB 20S 22W 20CCC 20S 23W 32CDA

Osborne

06S 12W 23CDC 07S 12W 28ABA 07S 15W 10CCC

Pawnee

2 IS 18W 32DAA
21S 19W 30BCC 21S 20U 29BBB 22S 15W 03AAA 22S 15W 03AAA2

Waterlevel notes
Q Q
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q

County

Well number

Pawnee (continued)

22S 16W 06BBA 22S 16W 23AAA 22S 17W 18AAD 22S 19W 07AAA
22S 19W 10BBA

23S 16W 35CDD2 23S 18W 28DAD

Phillips 04S 18W 23CDC

Pottawatomie 09S HE 19CDB 09S 11E 27CAA
09S HE 31DCC 09S 11E 32ADC 09S HE 34CAB

Pratt

09S 11E 35DDD 10S 08E 12CBB 10S 08E 14CBA 10S 10E 10DBC 10S 11E 01CBC
10S 11E 03BCA 10S 11E 04ACB 10S 12E 07BBC
26S 12W 34CDC 26S 12W 34CDC2 26S 13W 34BCB 26S 14W 17DCB 27S 12W 12DAA
27S 14W 12DDD 29S 12W 20CCD

Rawlins Reno

03S 33W 03DCC 03S 36W 17CCC 04S 36W 06BBB 05S 33W 29BDA
22S 06W 29DAB 23S 06W 31DCB 23S 09W 35CCC 26S 10W 18CDC

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q R
Q Q Q Q
R
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q

Table 4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year Continued

County Republic Rice
Riley
Rooks Rush
Saline Scott

Well number
01S 03W 01CCA 01S 03W 09C 01S 04W 15AAA
18S 09W 04BCC 18S 09W 04BCC2 18S 10W 24BBB 20S 08W 22AAA 20S 09W 12DDA
21S 08W 09CBD 21S 08W 25ABB
10S 07E 34BAA2 10S 07E 35DBB 10S 08E 23CDC 10S 09E 17BDD 10S 09E 19BBA
US 07E 01BCC
07S 17W 24BBB 07S 19W 23CDB
18S 17W 14BCC 18S 17W 14CCC 18S 17W 14CDC 18S 17W 15DAA 18S 17W 22AAD
18S 17W 23BCC 18S 18W 22DDD 18S 18W 27AAC 18S 18W 27CCB 18S 19W 20ADD
18S 20W 14CCC 18S 20W 19AAD
16S 02W 18BBB
16S 33W 19CBB 17S 32W 27BBB 17S 34W 06BCB 18S 32W 17ABA2 18S 33W 05CCC

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q

County^
Scott (continued)
Sedgwick

Q Q
A Q A Q Q
Q
A Q A
Q
Q Seward Q
Q
Q Q Q Q Q
89

Well number
18S 33W 26DAD2 18S 34W 25BBD 19S 32W 06CCB 19S 32W 32ACB 19S 33W 15DBD
19S 33W 29CBB2 20S 32W 07CBA 20S 33W 09BBB 20S 33W 21ABD
25S 01W 26DBD 26S 01W 19ABA 26S 01W 31CCC 26S 01W 31CCC2 26S 02W 02DDD
26S 02W 02DDD2 26S 02W 07AAA 26S 02W 07AAA2 26S 02W 10BBB 26S 02W 10DAA
26S 02W 14BAA 26S 02W 14DDD 26S 02W 15CBC 26S 02W 15DBB 26S 02W 22ABA
26S 02W 23CCC 26S 02W 24DDD 26S 02W 29AAA 28S 01W 11BCB 28S 01S 11CCD
28S 01W 15ACA2
31S 31W 08BCC 32S 32W 14BBB 32S 33W 21CDB 34S 33W 07CCB 35S 34W 10BBB

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q R Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q Q

Table 4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year Continued

County Shawnee
Sheridan Sherman
Stafford

Well number
11S 12E 01ABA US 13E 04ADA 11S 14E 13BBB US 14E 15ABB US 14E 18CBB
11S 14E 22CCC 11S 14E 24BBB US 15E 13DBC 11S 15E 14ADB 11S 15E 16DCA
US 15E 23DBD2 US 15E 24DBD US 16E 19DDD 11S 16E 29ACA
06S 30W 13BAA 07S 26W 19BBC 07S 28W 08BDC 07S 29W 27CCC 08S 30W 13DAA
09S 30W 35BBB 10S 30W 08DDD
06S 42W 02AAA 07S 37W 04BBC 07S 40W 36BAB 08S 39W 15CCC 08S 40W 12DBA
08S 40W 20CCC 08S 40W 25AAC 08S 42W 31DCD 09S 39W 19CCC 09S 40W 29BBB
09S 42W 08AAA 09S 42W 14AAA
21S 13W 27DDD2 22S 13W 29DAD 23S 13W 08CCB 23S 14W 30BBB 24S 13W 30BCB

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q R
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q

County Stafford (continued) Stanton
Stevens
Thomas
Trego Wabaunsee

Well number
24S 13W 36DDD 25S 11W 23DDD 25S 13W 03BBB 25S 13W 16ACC
27S 39W 27BBA 27S 40W 21DAA 27S 42W 31CCC 28S 39W 14BBC 28S 39W 36ABB
28S 40W 12DDD2 29S 41W 13ACC 29S 42W 24CCC 30S 40W 24CDC 30S 43W 34BBB
31S 35W 19CCC 31S 36W 02CDD 31S 37W 22BCC 32S 35W 08DDD 33S 38W 20DDB
34S 38W 02CAC
06S 32W 29CDC 06S 34W 01DDD 06S 34W 17CBC 06S 35W 26ACB 07S 36W 17CCC
08S 31W 03CDD 08S 32W 27DAB 08S 33W 34BBC 08S 34W 01BAC 08S 36W 18ABA2
09S 32W 27BCD 09S 33W 26DAD 10S 33W 06BBC
12S 23W 20CCC
10S 10E 15DCC 10S 12E 29ADD

Waterlevel notes
Q
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q 0 Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q 0
R
Q
Q Q Q
Q
Q Q

90

Table 4. Ground-water-level observation wells, 1984 water year Continued

County Wallace
Washington Wichita
Wyandotte

Well number
US 38W 35CCC2 US 42W 08DDC 13S 39W 33BBB 13S 42W 10BAC 14S 42W 14DBO
155 38W 28DBB 15S 39W 02BCD 15S 39W 08ACC 15S 39W 26ACC 15S 40W 03BAB
15S 40W 26CAB 15S 41W 10BAB 15S 41W 36DDB2
01S 05E 05ADA 04S 02E 14CCC 05S 01E 20ADA 05S 01E 31DDD
16S 35W 20CCC 16S 37W 13BBC 16S 37W 30ACB 16S 38W 10ABB 17S 35W 30CBB
17S 36W 33BCB 17S 37W 28CCC 17S 38W 21BBB 18S 35W 14DCD 18S 37W 21BBB
18S 38W 20ACC2
US 24E 14BDA US 24E 32ABA2 US 25E 20BAB2

Waterlevel notes
Q Q Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q
Q Q Q

County

Well number

Waterlevel notes

91

Table 5. Surface-water-quality stations, 1984 water year

I dent, no.

Station name

Sampling purpose

Coop, or support

068447
8465 8479
8538 8566
8585
8635 8639 8670 8695
8710 8725 8730
8740 8759
8769 8776
87965
8844 8870
8875 8920 89235
9119 9140
9166
9170

Missouri River Basin

S. Fk. Sappa Cr. nr Brewster Beaver Cr. at Cedar Bluffs
Prairie Dog Cr. ab Keith Sebelius Lake
White Rock Cr. nr Burr Oak Republican R. at Clay Center

SED
SED, BED SED
SED CHEM, BIOL, TOC, METAL,
COLI, FIELD, SED

N. Fk. Smoky Hill R. nr McAl1 aster
Big Cr. nr Hays
N. Fk. Big Cr. nr Victoria Saline R. nr Russell Saline R. at Tescott

SED
SED SED SED SED, BED

N. Fk. Solomon R. at Glade N. Fk. Solomon R. at Portis
S. Fk. Solomon R. ab Webster Res.
S. Fk. Solomon R. at Osborne Solomon R. nr Glen Elder

SED CHEM, FIELD SED
CHEM, FIELD CHEM, COLI, FIELD

Solomon R. at Niles Smoky Hill R. at Enterprise
Kings Cr. nr Manhattan
Little Blue R. nr Barnes Big Blue R. nr Manhattan

SED, BED, OBS CHEM, BIOL, TOC, METAL,
SED, BED, COLI, FIELD OBS, PEST CHEM, METAL, TOC, RAD, FIELD, SED SED
CHEM, BIOL, TOC, METAL, SED, COLI, FIELD

Kansas R. at Wamego Stranger Cr. nr Tonganoxie Kansas R. at DeSoto
Dragoon Cr. nr Burlingame Pottawatomie Cr. nr Garnett

SED, BED SED
CHEM, BIOL, TOC, METAL, SED, BED, COLI, FIELD, PEST
SED SED

Marais des Cygnes R. nr Ks.- SED

Mo. State line

Little Osage R. at Fulton

SED

KWO KWO KWO
KWO CBR
KWO
KWO KWO KWO KWO
KWO MRB KWO
MRB MRB
KDHE CBR/KWO
CBR
KWO CBR
KWO KWO CBR
KWO KWO
KC-CE
KC-CE

92

Table 5. Surface-water-quality stations, 1984 water year Continued

I dent, no.

Station name

Sampling purpose

Coop, or support

071375
1380 13865 1398 1400
1412 1419 1423 14286 1433
14333 143665 1442 14478
14491
1452 1455 1457 1465
14707
1478 15601
15622 1575 1579
1675 1698 1707 1795 17973
179795 18225 1835
1840

Arkansas River Basin

Arkansas R. nr Coolldge
Arkansas R. at Syracuse White Woman Cr. nr Leotl Mulberry Cr. nr Dodge City Arkansas R. nr Klnsley

CHEM, BIOL, TOC, METAL, PEST, COLI, FIELD, SED
SED, BED, SED, BED SED
SED, BED

Pawnee R. nr Lamed
Walnut Cr. at Albert
Rattlesnake Cr. nr Macksvllle Cow Cr. nr Claflln
Cow Cr. nr Lyons

SED SED, BED SED SED SED

Arkansas R. nr Hutchinson Little Ark. R. at Alta Mills Little Ark. R. at Valley Ctr. N. Fk. Ninnescah R. ab Cheney
Res
S. Fk. Ninnescah R. nr Pratt

SED, BED SED SED SED, BED
SED

S. Fk. Ninnescah R. nr Murdock Ninnescah R. nr Peck Slate Creek at Wellington Arkansas R. at Arkansas City
Whltewater R. at ToWanda

SED, BED
SED, BED SED
CHEM, BIOL, TOC, METAL, RAD, PEST, SED, BED, COLI, FIELD
SED

Walnut R. at W1nf1eld N. Fk. dmarron R. at Rich-
field Bear Cr. nr Johnson Crooked Cr. nr Nye
Cavalry Cr. at Coldwater

SED SED
SED, BED SED SED, BED

Otter Cr. at CHmax Elk R. at Elk Falls Big Hill Cr. nr Cherryvale
Neosho R. at Council Grove Neosho R. nr Amerlcus

SED SED SED SED
SED

Cottonwood R. nr Plymouth Cottonwood R. bl Marion Lake Neosho R. nr Parsons
Lightning Cr. nr McCune

SED
SED CHEM, BIOL, TOC, METAL,
SED, COLI, FIELD SED

93

CBR
KWO KWO KWO KWO
KWO KWO KWO KWO KWO
KWO KWO T-CE KWO
KWO
KWO KWO KWO CBR/ T-CE/ KWO KWO
KWO KWO
KWO KWO KWO
T-CE T-CE T-CE T-CE T-CE
T-CE T-CE CBR/ KWO KWO

Table 6. Ground-water-quality observation wells, 1984 water year

County
Atchison Barber
Barton Brown Butler Chase Cherokee
Cheyenne Clark
Clay
Cloud

Well number
05S 20E 18CDC 06S 18E 22BCD
SOS 11W 34BBC 31S 12W 24BDD 32S 10W 21BBA 33S 11W 33ABB
19S 11W 31C 20S 14W 27BCA
01S 17E 07CBC 02S 17E 31DDC
24S 03E 17CAB 29S 03E 20BAB 29S 07E 07DDA
19S 07E 27CBC 19S 08E 20AAA 22S 08E 05CCA
32S 23E 06AD 33S 23E 13ABB 33S 25E 18DAA 34S 24E 17DCC 34S 24E 26DB
34S 25E 23AAC
05S 38W 22ACB
30S 25W 14A 31S 23W 07BBA 32S 23W 26DDD 33S 23W 01DBB 34S 25W 36DC
06S 01E 02BAC 07S 02E 03CDC 07S 04E 20ADC 08S 02E 11ADB 10S 01E 17CDC
05S 01W 26ABD 05S 03W 32ADA 08S 01W 17DBC 08S 05W 14ACD

County
Comanche Cowley
Crawford
Decatur Dickinson
Doniphan Douglas
Edwards Ellis'
El 1sworth Flnney
Ford Geary Gove

Well number
32S 18W 07C 33S 20W 03BAC
32S 03E 07DDD 32S 03E 25BBC 34S 03E 26BDA 34S 04E 35CDC
29S 23E 24ACD 29S 25E 01ACB 30S 25E 28DDA
04S 27W 17DAC
12S 04E 31AAD 13S 01E 18DCA 14S 03E 35ABA
02S 19E 27CBC 03S 21E 06BCC
US 18E 34BDA 12S 20E 19AAA 13S 21E 05DBB
24S 18W 25BDC 25S 20W 07CAA
13S 18W 03CCD 14S 18W 25AAB 15S 18W 28CAC
15S 08W 19BCD 17S 09W 16DAB
21S 32W 08ABD 23S 31W 03DCC 23S 33W 17BBB 24S 33W 07ACA
26S 24W 29ACA
12S 05E 01BBA
US 26W 04DCA 15S 29W 13CAB

94

Table 6. Ground-water-quality observation wells, 1984 water yearContinued

County

Well number

Graham
Grant Gray
Greeley Hamilton
Harper Harvey
Haskell Hodgeman Jackson Jefferson
Jewel!
Johnson Kearny

07S 21W 02BCC 08S 21W 17ACB 08S 25W 14DCC
28S 37W 30BBD
24S 29W 19BBB 27S 28W 05AAA 29S 28W 28CDC
17S 40W 15CCB
23S 42W 19CBB
n~ir* M n> i or*A/»n
24S 39W 30BBD 24S 40W 19BBC
32S 07W 02CDA 32S 08W 20BCB
22S 01W 15AA 23S 01W 32BBC 23S 03W 29DBD 24S 03W 26ADA
27S 32W 06CBB
21S 23W 04BDD 23S 23W 06CAB
05S 16E 10BBA
07S 19E 29BBD 08S 19E 26CDA 11S 16E 13CBD
02S 09W 23BAC 03S 06W 21CAB
12S 22E 25BBC
21S 37W 02CDC 23S 25W 24CCB 24S 35W 23BCC 24S 36W 16BAD 25S 36W 28BBD

County

Well number

Kingman

27S 10W 32DCC
30S 05W 12DDC 30S 09W 10ADC

Kiowa

28S 18W 19CCB

Lane 18S 29W 13DBA

Leavenworth 08S 21E 19BAA

Lincoln

10S 07W 12ACA 12S 06W ISAAC 12S 07W 06AAA
12S 10W 21DDD

Logan

US 32W 03ADB 11S 36W 06DBB 13S 35W 23ACD 13S 36W 20CCB

McPherson

17S 03W 17DBD 17S 05W 23DAB
18S 03W 14BDD 19S 03W 29DBA 20S 01W 11CCB

Marion

19S 01E 04ACC 22S 03E 04AA

Marshall 04S 06E 16DDD
04S 09E 16AAB

Meade

32S 28W 11BA 35S 30W 10CDB

Mitchell 06S 09W 26CAD

Morris

14S 06E 34AAC 14S 08E 07DAC

Morton

32S 42W 14CCC 33S 43W 27CDC

Nemaha
95

02S 12E 26CAD 04S 12E 18ADD 04S 13E 35BAA
05S 14E 11ACC

Table 6. Ground-water-quallty observation wells, 1984 water yearContinued

County

Well number

County

Well number

Ness Norton Osborne
Ottawa
Pawnee Phillips
P ottawatom ie
Pratt
Rawl ins Reno
Republic

19S 23W 05CCD 20S 23W 29DBB
02S 21W 08ADD 05S 24W 14CCA
06S HW 28ACD 06S 12W 06CBB 07S 15W 11ADD 10S 15W 18AAA
09S 04W 10BBC 12S 03W 01DBA 12S 05W 15ADD
21S 16W 29ABA
01S 20W 23DDD 04S 16W 27CCA 04S 18W 23DCA 04S 20W 34CAB
07S 07E 23BBA 10S 09E 09CDC 10S 10E 09BDB 10S 12E 09ADB
26S 11W 30ADD 26S 14W 18CCD 27S 13W 08DDC 29S 14W 23BBA
03S 36W 18DCC
22S 04W 12DDD 22S 07W 10CAA 23S 06W 13BBA 24S 10W 15CAB 25S 04W 05DAD 25S 08W 10BAD 26S 10W 05DD
01S 02W 33DCD 01S 03W 02CCB 01S 04W 31BCC 03S 04W 17DAD

Rice
R1ley
Rooks Rush Russell Sal 1 ne
Scott Sedgwlck
Seward Shawnee Sheridan Sherman
96

19S 06W 29CCD 19S 09W 31DAB 20S 08W 16AA 2 IS 08W 21BAC
07S 06E 21CDD 09S 05E 01BCB 10S 07E 32DBD US 06E 12ADB
07S 18W 24BAD 09S 18W 35CCD 09S 19W 34BBD
16S 17W 16DCD 18S 20W 20CDA
US 12W 07DDB US 14W 07CAA
14S 03W 25BAD 15S 02W 26DDD 15S 05W 04ABB
18S 33W 24A
25S 01W 07BAA 25S 01W 30ABB 25S 01W 36ACB 26S 01E 17AAB 27S 02W 36BBB
29S 01E 05CAA 29S 01E 08CBB 29S 02W 23DDA
31S 32W 03DAD 34S 33W 32AA
US 15E 13BBC
08S 28W 09ABC 08S 28W 15BBA
08S 39W 19DCA 08S 42W 20CAC

Table 6. Ground-water-quality observation wells, 1984 water yearContinued

County

Well number

County

Well number

Smith Stafford
Stanton
Stevens Sumner

03S 15W 20DCC
23S 13W 33BDB 24S 15W 15CDA
28S 41W 36DB 30S 39W 23BBB
33S 37W 16AC
30S 02E 06CAB 31S 01E 04BDC 31S 02E 02BBB 31S 03W 05ACA 32S 02W 06BDD
33S 02E 06BBA 34S 02W 21DAB

Thomas

07S 33W 31DBB 07S 36W 15DBB

Trego

12S 22W 08BAB

Washington 02S 03E 32ABB 04S 05E 09CAA 05S 02E 12CBA

W1ch1ta 18S 37W 13CAC

Wyandotte 10S 25E 27DBD
11S 23E 28CCA US 25E 20ABA

97

