U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR U.S. Geological Survey
A SUGGESTED RATIONALE AND SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR USING RULE-BASED EXPERT COMPUTER SYSTEMS (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE)
IN RECURRENT PETROLEUM RESOURCE ASSESSMENTS
Open-File Report 93-12 &
William C. Butler July, 1992
This report is preliminary and has not been reviewed for conformity with U.S. Geological Survey editorial standards. The use of trade names is for descriptive purposes only and does not indicate endorsement by the U.S. Geological Survey
*MS 971, Box 25046, DFC Denver, CO. 80225

TABLE OF CONTENTS
page
Purpose ........................................................ 1
Justification ................................................... 2
Introduction .................................................... 4
Overview of play analysis methodology in petroleum resource assessment .................................................... 6
Overview of knowledge-based expert systems ...................... 9
Some developments of expert systems, including those by the U.S. Geological Survey ............................................. 12
Geographic Information Systems (CIS) in expert systems .......... 16
Some government databases accessible for petroleum resource assessment .................................................... 20
How artificial intelligence and expert systems might be used for hydrocarbon play analysis ..................................... 22
Limitations to implementation ................................... 26
Hypothetical example of a prototype rule-based system ........... 27
Discussion and conclusions ...................................... 35
Selected and cited references ................................... 37
Appendix A: 1) "What makes up an expert system and how does it work?" .................................................. 121 2) "Expert syterns breed knowledge engineers" .................. 123 3) "Why use expert systems in petroleum exploration?" ......... 125
Appendix B: "Overview of the play analysis resource assessment method" .... 126

PURPOSE
This report explores in non-technical terms the potential for using existing U.S. Government computer hardware and commerciallyavailable expert systems software to standardize, integrate, query, and analyze geologic databases. The use of expert systems can be incorporated as a feasible tool during the initial information-gathering phases of appraising undiscovered onshore United States oil and gas by the Branch of Petroleum Geology of the U.S. Geological Survey. Although expert systems could eventually be developed to guide the entire national assessment process, which is a major recurrent undertaking by perhaps more than seventy-five scientists who must characterize 80 provinces, my report is purely an overview. A con-ceptual framework is presented for logical possibilities of using current computer technology to handle spatial information. The report limits its scope to a small prototype representing one geographic assessment province in the Colorado Plateau of northern Arizona. The report is not a project proposal, but rather a rationale for the future development of expert systems in resource appraisal work.
The ideas and conclusions of this generalized report are not the end result of an extensive research project. For well over a decade expert systems have been researched and utilized to help solve geologic problems (see Duda and others, 1977; Duda, Gaschnig, and Hart, 1979; and, Ennis, 1983). More recent expert systems have been used to classify sedimentary basins and estimate undiscovered worldwide petroleum resources (Miller, 1986a). Cheong (1990) has described and implemented them to "Organize the available geologic data for characterizing hydrocarbon fields, plays, and prospects and sedimentary basins uniformly in terms of their essential geologic characteristics." Morgan and others (1988), Pai (1988), and Strobel (1989) are several other current developers with the foresight to use expert systems to assess petroleum resources.
Although most expert systems developed to date have been useful, they nonetheless require significant refinements; most complex expert systems are built by trial and error. My views and presentation on the potential role of expert systems in the Branch of Petroleum Geology (Geologic Division, U.S. Geological Survey) are simply intended to call attention to a neglected area of research in petroleum resource assessment. The report attempts to stimulate further interest into geologic investigations that could result in a more highly structured decision-making process, and hence faster and more reliable resource assessments.
Once again I emphasize that my intent is to generally discuss and advocate the use of innovative expert systems in conjunction with our presently used methodology; it is NOT to completely replace the current pre-quantitative methodology. This report has no immediate relevancy to the quantitative calculations and algorithms currently used by the U.S. Geological Survey. The reader should not construe this report as criticism of existing methods, or an attempt to modify our current probabilistic or analytical methodologies which have been

"tested by fire" over many years. On the contrary, my motivation is to make the difficult job of qualifying, and hence quantifying, undiscovered resources easier. With the existing commercial expert systems, our general strategy should be to integrate and manipulate the various geologic databases owned by, or accessible to, the U.S. Geological Survey. My purpose is to cite the importance of, and to promote the efficacy of, an assessment system using current computer technology to automate human expertise. I advocate the building of a small prototype assessment expert system by a small multidisciplinary team of scientists. The report may help to provide the basic ingredients for future work. It is beyond the scope of this work to actually build a prototype system.
The second objective of this report is to suggest some relevant literature references for understanding the geology of northern Arizona; this can be a starting point in building a master, customdesigned database. It is easier to design expert system rules if one knows what kind of knowledge is available. Provincial rules can be adjusted if the system needs to be applied to surrounding geographic areas, or if the knowledge is expanded. References in this report were selected to initially cover: 1) the general geology of northern Arizona, which is the suggested test area where development of the database for an expert system appears to be ideally suited, 2) historical investigations of theoretical and applied resource appraisal methodology, 3) theoretical and applied artificial intelligence and expert systems, and 4) the origin and occurrence of petroleum.
References in this report were also selected in order to provide a solid basis for writing valid expert system rules using the principles of modern petroleum geology. The wide extent of the references will allow a geologist beginning an assessment project to apply state-of-the-art computer-based technology and methods. For any interested reader who might like to compare predicted versus actual oil and gas resources, the history of the petroleum resource assessment in the United States has been provided in the selected references.
JUSTIFICATION
We obviously live in an electronic world (the "age of information and communication") where the proliferation of information (and hopefully, knowledge) grows exponentially, doubling every five years. I believe within this plethora of scientific data and databases there is an unrealized potential, or at least an under-utilized application, for using state-of-the-art, menu-driven, rule-based "expert systems" (within the domain of artificial intelligence) to help manage our petroleum assessment information. Expert systems basically handle complex, real-world problems and are much more sophisticated than the "electronic light table" concept held by some. These systems solve problems using a convergent model of expert human reasoning, reaching the SAME CONCLUSION (single output) from a multitude of input data/information that a human would reach if given an equivalent problem. They are an extension of the expert's mind. Expert systems, as described in this report, can be used as a consultation process,

i.e., helping to frame intelligent questions in combination with, or as an adjunct to, existing probablistic methodology for the oil and gas assessment of both mature and frontier petroleum provinces.
Successfully-implemented rule-based expert systems have flexibility and, hence, have wide-spread use in all disciplines of science and in the management of the U.S. economy today; thus, the ideas presented herein are not revolutionary, but rather a suggestion to integrate selected surface and subsurface databases of the U.S. Geological Survey, and interface them with commercially developed software. An expert system could manage these databases for the maximum accuracy, benefit, and productivity of resource-assessment scientists.
The efficacy and intensity of petroleum exploration is a function of the perceived risk of finding the remaining resources. It depends not only on the size of the undiscovered economically-recoverable oil and gas resources but on many physical, economic, and institutional factors, in addition to the current state of science and technology. Politics, prices, energy policies and regulations, environmental considerations, world production and distribution strategies, and other well-known supply-and-demand factors control exploration (e.g., see Adelman, 1980; Akins, 1986; Barss, 1978; Beck, 1991; Bohi, 1981; Bohi and Montgomery, 1982; Fisher, 1987; Kash and Rycroft, 1984; Ketelsen, 1987; Linden, 1973; Masters, Root, and Attanasi, 1991; McCloy, 1986; Petzet, 1991; and Thiel, 1979). These supply-and-demand factors are not addressed in this report because much literature already exists on the driving forces of exploration; they are simply beyond the realm of consideration of expert systems as outlined in this report. The eventual implementation of expert systems for resource assessment and the numbers generated should provide an evaluation (incentive or impediment) of exploration's efficacy rather than an understanding of the problems associated with the cause-andeffect of supply and demand.
Additionally, the efficacy of petroleum exploration, locally or regionally, depends on the validity of the assessment model used and on how thoroughly potential hydrocarbon plays are evaluated. These are factors that each scientist can individually control based upon the extent and quality of the wide array of geologic information that is synthesized and presented to those who must systematically quantify it. The references covering resource assessment methodology and results in this report are cited because it is important for the reader to know where and how the undiscovered, economically recoverable, conventional petroleum resource numbers/estimates have originated, and to know why the different methodologies used over the past century have resulted in significantly different resource estimates for conventional petroleum.
Work on the next national petroleum assessment has begun; Geological Survey open-file reports by individual province geologists are due for publication in early 1995 and the combined national totals of all geologic provinces are due in early 1996. Unconventional petroleum resources producible in a borehole, such as coalbed methane, gas

hydrates, and tight-gas sands, will be included for the first time in these estimates/reports. Undoubtedly, these inclusions will prove to be an added complexity and challenge to achieving consistent and creditable results.
Resource assessment methodology, with or without expert systems, is not precise and probably never will be. Although the methodology is continually evolving and being refined, the work incorporates much subjective judgment and "educated guessing" about the prerequisite geologic factors needed for hydrocarbon accumulation. Undiscovered resources are continually being converted into reserves, and the steady improvements in technology are other factors influencing the validity of resource assessment estimates.
Diversity of estimates over time has depended upon the methodology used (Miller, 1986b). Expert systems, however, can provide consistency by forcing the assessors to think about the empirical associations (i.e., addressing and writing the rules required in expert systems) in geology that are prerequisite to hydrocarbon accumulations in sedimentary basins. The theoretical principles of nature and geology are not the fundamental rules of a rule-based system. The inferred relationships and qualities, or "rules of thumb", among source rocks, reservoirs, traps, and timing of generation, migration, and trap formation, for example, are the bases for writing rules. Rules and empirical associations can be codified in expert systems to screen out all cases that are beyond the limits of any plausible existence, or that violate any of the necessary prerequisites for hydrocarbon accumulations. This is not to say that innovative rules cannot be incorporated; they can be added or subtracted at the will of the investigator.
INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (i.e., application of computers to solve problems formerly requiring human brainpower) is the "technological glue" that holds expert systems together and helps the user with the large amount of data and choices to be made. The field of artificial intelligence ("thinking machines") probably began in the mid-to-late 1950s when computer scientists first "taught" machines to play chess, and when cognitive psychologists and engineers attempted computational logic, general problem-solving, symbolic integration, and pattern recognition with machines. These early attempts either failed or proved only marginally successful because the tasks were too difficult; thus, research on artificial intelligence generally fell out of favor until the early 1970's. With rekindled interest, numerous artificial intelligence applications were begun in the early 1970's and by the late 1970's significant applications, as expert systems, had been successful (Shapiro, 1987). Today, expert computer systems, using symbolic knowledge, can simulate or imitate the human reasoning process (Hinton, 1992). Furthermore, they have the ability to clearly explain their conclusion(s).
An expert system is essentially identical to a "knowledge-based

system". Briefly, expert systems process information (which can be non-numerical), structure knowledge, reason by analogy, and solve problems. The component parts of an expert system are: 1) a user interface, 2) an inference engine, and 3) one or more topic-specific (knowledge) database(s). For this last component, computer networking should be able to provide any Geological Survey scientist access to a wide array of data. Modern computer "interfaces", or bridges of communication, can integrate the plethora of traditional, highlysophisticated, software packages with expert systems.
For one to use expert systems, one does not need to be a computer programmer, nor be proficient in writing complicated system languages. The logic is already built into the inference engine, which by following logical paths, draws the decision or conclusion, and the user/developer needs only to know: 1) the principles of petroleum geology, and 2) a thorough understanding of the subsurface geology in the area to be assessed, in order to write valid "if-then"- and "true-false"type rules. By prompting the user for additional information, a use of expert systems forces the "knowledge engineer" to construct databases that specifically address the attributes of oil and gas accumulation.
As problem-solving aids in our society, expert systems have been developed to do a variety of impressive general-to-specific tasks; a very small sampling of the many thousands of applications currently being used include: identification of hazardous materials, controlling NASA's space shuttles in flight, federal tax planning, employee performance evaluations, interpreting aerial imagery, aiding archaeologists in finding burial sites, diagnosing medical diseases (some of the earliest applications), diagnosing auto problems and recommending corrective actions, interpreting seismic data and seismic lines, preventing confidential government information from being disclosed, predicting business trends, controlling particle accelerators, speech and written signature recognition, weather forecasting, legal strategy, deciphering chemical/molecular structures, professional football game predictions, zoning ordinance enforcement, trouble-shooting scientific instruments, reviewing computer security systems, identifying fossils, military intelligence applications, determining search strategy to find lost persons, playing chess against the world's champion Gary Kasparov (and winning!...some of the times), waterresource and forest management, stock-market forecasting, horse-racing predictions, analyzing bank loan applications, designing pipelines, determining the fastest routes for airplanes and ambulances, operating quality control systems, making classification schemes in science, analyzing dip meter data, solving genetics problems, controlling humanoid robots having automated sensing, reasoning, and planning capabilities. (See the selected references section of this report for specific papers that describe many of these applications).
Certainly, if computer programs can accomplish the tasks listed above, they can make life easier for geologists (see Ennis, 1983) and Maslyn, 1986) who must assess oil and gas potential. Expert systems are being used more and more because many of mankind's present-day problems do not have algorithmic solutions. Much time and lots of

money are spent collecting important and valuable knowledge and data about problems. Expert systems are an excellent way to apply this information and to save it for posterity. These systems are good at modeling and simulating real-world heuristic processes where there is only partially-known information.
OVERVIEW OF PLAY ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY IN PETROLEUM RESOURCE ASSESSMENT
The framework for the assessment process, play analysis, currently endorsed by the U.S. Geological Survey to assess undiscovered hydrocarbons, can be divided into four main phases as described below. Hydrocarbon plays are families of similar prospective and/or discovered accumulations of oil and/or gas having commonality in their depositional systems, and hence related to usually one geologic formation. The boundaries of plays are limited by commonalities in generation or migration of hydrocarbons, or in reservoirs or traps. Expert systems initially should be set up to do the first, second, third, and eventually part of the fourth stages of the petroleum assessment process as described below:
1) Play delineation and characterization; 2) A province geologist is assigned to an area of the United States where this "expert" has a good understanding of such factors as the stratigraphy, tectonic and thermal evolution, reservoir and sourcerock characteristics, types of traps in the basin, petroleum production history (if any), amount of exploration, and knowledge of subsurface data (seismic, boreholes, etc.). Given his/her conceptual model, the expert has a good intuition of where future discovery wells may or should be drilled; 3) Analysis is made of the databases covering such attributes and aspects listed under #1 above; 4) The province expert synthesizes all data and information and makes iterative subjective interpretations of where the economically-recoverable oil and gas fields will most likely be found. In order to quantify the total resources of an area, the province geologist must provide probability distributions of the undiscovered accumulations (both size and number of accumulations for the seven fractiles - 100, 95, 75, 50, 25, 5, and 0). Making accurate predictions in the face of uncertainty is the most subjective part of the assessment, and a difficult task (Capen, 1976); 4) Quantitative estimates of the probability distribution are forecast by the "expert" in concert with other resource methodology professionals.
Since 1909, the national assessment of undiscovered oil and gas resources by the federal government has been a recurring labor-intensive task. For examples of these assessments, see: Dolton and others, 1981; Egloff, 1952; Garland, Carrales, and Conway, 1974; Hubbert, 1974; Mast, 1978; Mast and others, 1979, 1988, 1989; Mast and 4 others, 1989; Masters, 1979; McCulloh, 1973; Miller and others, 1975; Netschert, 1958; Potential Gas Committee, 1967, 1973, 1979, and 1987; Pratt and Brobst, 1974; Rice, 1986; Sheldon, 1976; Theobald, Schweinfurth, and Duncan, 1972; U.S. Geological Survey, 1922; U.S.

Geological Survey and the Minerals Management Service, 1988; U.S. Department of the Interior, 1960; and, Weeks, 1950. The next national assessment of oil and gas is currently underway with the new estimates due in 1994 and the formal report due in 1995; it will be more complex than previous assessments because it will include several categories of unconventional hydrocarbons.
During the last 40-50 years, many methods of qualitative and quantitative hydrocarbon resource analysis have been developed by many researchers for area/size-scales ranging from site-specific to local basin to regional to continental. Some of the more significant methods include: extrapolation of historical trends; areal- or volumetric-yield methods; discovery modeling; basin analog methods; geochemical material balance equations; historical extrapolation; and, direct subjective assessment methods (Charpentier and Wesley, 1986; Crovelli, 1987; Crovelli and Balay, 1986; Dolton and others, 1981; Forman and Hinde, 1985; Haun, 1975; Kudryashova and Starik-Bludov, 1940; Lee and Wang, 1982; Linstone and turoff, 1975; Mast and others, 1979; Menard, 1981; Miller, 1981 and 1986b; Moody and Geiger, 1975; Neruchev, 1964; Netschert, 1958; Podruski and others, 1988; Resnick, 1987; Rice, 1986; Root and Attanasi, 1992; Steinhart and Bultman, 1983; White, 1980; White and Gehman, 1979).
The Branch of Petroleum Geology informally defined and described "a petroleum play" in order to provide common ground for the several dozen geologic province experts who used the play analysis method in their national oil and gas assessment (U.S. Geological Survey, 1984). This document stated,
"A play consists of a group of prospects and/or discovered fields [or accumulations] having common geologic characteristics such as source rock, trapping mechanism, structural history, etc, [which] may contain gas and/or oil. (Geological Survey of Canada, 1982).
The play concept explains hydrocarbon accumulation and relates the deposits and prospects contained in the play to the common geologic elements which control generation, migration, and entrapment of hydrocarbons. In its fullest form the play concept considers all significant aspects of structure, stratigraphy, geochemistry and geologic history, even though knowledge of these may be uncertain.
Plays may be confirmed or may be purely hypothetical, where there is not assurance as to their existence. However identified, plays have both discrete geologic and geographic limits. Plays are commonly described on a stratigraphic basis, where the group of prospects and/or accumulations have the same basic trap type and reservoir facies. In this context, a stratigraphic interval may contain one or more plays, which may overlap geographically, and plays in different stratigraphic intervals may be geographically coincident, partially overlapping, or mutually exclusive.
Prospects within a play have relatively common risk and

similar probability distributions of geological variables. Although a play is an aggregate of one or more prospects and/or accumulations which are conceived as having similar characteristics and sharing common geologic elements, it can be described, in some instances, in broad enough terms to include a degree of internal diversity. For example, certain structural plays may have mixed reservoir types, or some major stratigraphicor structural-setting plays may have mixed trap types. However, combining distinctly different accumulations or prospect types into a single play can result in mixed populations which are difficult to analyze and can cause problems in risking."
The play analysis method, according to Charpentier and Wesley (1986),
"is a more detailed form of volumetric yield analysis. Whereas areal yield and volumetric yield methods primarily use geologic data, play analysis is performed at a scale detailed enough to use both geologic and deposit size data. The methods consist of generating and then combining estimates of the number of undiscovered deposits and estimates of the sizes of undiscovered deposits. Often the estimates of sizes of undiscovered deposits are calculated using geologic data, such as structure sizes, reservoir thicknesses, and porosities, in a volumetric equation. The deposit size estimates may also come directly from analog deposit size data or from a combination of deposit size and historical data by way of a discovery model. Because of the more detailed scale of play analysis, risk is more likely to be assessed separately than it would be for areal or volumetric yield studies. Prospect analysis is a subset of play analysis; it is the special case where the number of prospects in a given play is determined to be one. Baker et.al. (1984), Bird (1984), Canada Department of Energy, Mines, and Resources (1977), Lee and Wang (1983a,b), Miller (1981, 1982a), Procter and Taylor (1984) and L.P. White (1981) are some of the main references."
Alien and Alien (1990), Perrodon (1980, 1983, and 1992), Perrodon and Masse (1984), and Magoon (1987, 1988a,b, and 1992), in their efforts to refine the qualitative assessment of oil and gas resources, have proposed a scheme for characterizing and classifying potential and existing petroleum-generating systems of the United States. These systems model the genesis, migration, and trapping of petroleum with respect to source rocks, reservoir rocks, and seals. Identification of these models not only seems to be a logical first step but is essential in the strategy and goal toward eventual computer description of all knowledge about an accumulation, or potential accumulation, of petroleum. The remaining task is to specify rules that can characterize not only the petroleum system (play ?) but also the surrounding areas, which may be upgraded to play status (or downgraded to non-play status) when additional subsurface information becomes available. Magoon has also indicated that petroleum systems may provide reasonable quantitative estimates of the total amount of petroleum in the system. Magoon (1988b) stated:

"Geologists are continually looking for new ways to organize information or data into arrays to be interpreted in innovative ways to answer a specific question. One of the oldest ways, but still a very useful one, is to organize information into a geologic map. Over the last four decades, many new maps have been invented by petroleum geologists that related to the reservoir rocks, structure, stratigraphy, and source rocks. With the advent of the computer, a plethora of ways to organize geologic information is available; in fact, finding the proper way to organize is sometimes a problem. As more geological, geophysical, and geochemical information about petroleum occurrence accrues, there is a need to organize and categorize our ideas into conceptual models based on geologic processes. These models must then be classified so that comparative studies can be carried out.
The petroleum system is proposed as a unique approach to research, exploration, and resource assessment. A petroleum system includes all those elements that are essential for an oil and gas deposit to exist in nature. The basic elements include a petroleum source rock, migration path, reservoir rock, seal, and trap. All elements must be placed correctly in time and space for a petroleum system to occur. A petroleum deposit includes high concentrations of any of the following substances: thermal and microbial matural gas, condensate, oil, and solid bitumen. The description of a petroleum system includes its stratigraphic limits, geographic extent, and geologic timespan. The system is named using the stratigraphic nomenclature for the source rock and the most important reservoir rock; these two names are then separated by a hyphen. The confidence that a particular source rock generated hydrocarbons that are trapped in a certain reservoir is expressed in the level of certainty; known(!), hypothetical (.), or speculative (?)."
Each of the above noted assessment methods has its own advantages and disadvantages, depending on the geographic area being assessed, and each "has had its place" in the continuing refinement of methods. Some methods can be combined. My report addresses an application to only the currently used (national assessment) play-oriented method (see Mast and others, 1989; White, 1981). In the play analysis method the basic unit of analysis is the stratigraphic unit. A petroleum play is larger than a single prospect but smaller than a sedimentary basin. There is a high degree of commonality among geologic characteristics for each play, i.e., homogeneity of geology, but much less commonality between plays. A general description of the play analysis method is provided herein as Appendix B.
OVERVIEW OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED EXPERT SYSTEMS
As an emerging discipline of science in America, artificial intelligence enjoyed a great enthusiasm in the early 1960s with anathema coming in the late 1960's to early 1970s, and a resurgent explosion of interest in the 1980s. In the last 10 years, thousands of articles

have been written about expert systems, which is a branch or application of artificial intelligence.
For the reader who wants more information on expert systems (knowledge engineering), i.e., their construction and applications, refer to some of these selected references: Aleksander and Burnett (1987), Barr, Cohen, and Feigenbaum (4 volumes 1979-1989), Buchanan (1986), Bundy (1986), Charniak and McDermott (1985), Coombs and Alty, 1984; Dabrowski and Fong (1991), Davis (1982, 1989), Davis and Lenat (1980), Deering, 1985, Duda (1981b), Duda and Gaschnig (1981), Duda and Shortliffe (1983), Fang, Shultz, and Chen (1986), Fetzer (1988), Fox (1984), Gevarter (1983, 1984a,b, and 1987), Harmon and King (1985), Harris (1989), Hayes-Roth, Waterman, and Lenat (1983), Jackson (1985), Maggio (1988), Michie (1979, 1982), Nau (1983), Nilsson (1980), Rauch-Hindin (1985, 1986), Rich and Waters (1986), Risch and others (1988), Rosenberg (1986), Rychener (1985), Schorr and Rappaport (1989), Shapiro (1987), Slagle and Hamburger (1985), Smith (1984), Stock (1987), Tanimoto (1987), Thompson and Thompson (1985), Walker (1988), Waterman (1986), Weiss and Kulikowski (1984), Williams (1984), and Winston and Brown (1979). Buchanan (1986), in particular, has an extensive bibliography on expert systems.
Some references that specifically address the development of expert systems and directly or indirectly address their application to resource assessment include: Andriole (1985), Bailey and Thompson (1990), Barr and Feigenbaum (1982), Bundy and others (1985), Calkins and others (1980), Cartwright and Leonard (1990), Cheeseman (1983), Cohen and Feigenbaum (1986), Coulson and others (1987), Davis and Lenat (1980), Duda (1980a), Duda, Gaschnig, and Hart (1979), Duda and Shortliffe (1983), Fang, Shultz, and Chen (1986), Fowler (1987), Gale (1986), Gallant (1985), Gordon and others (1987), Hayes-Roth and others (1983), Hinton (1985), Joshi (1985), Kearney (1990), Klimasauskas (1991), Leonard and Fried (1989), Leonard, Fried, and Milam (1989), Lightwave Consultants (1985), Maggio (1988), Maslyn (1986), McCammon (1990), Miller and others (1990), Minasi (1990), Morese (1987), Neuron Data (1989), Nilsson (1980), Pallatto (1989), Paperback Software (1988), Parker (1986), Rauch-Hindin (1985), Rejerski and Kapuscinski (1990), Rich (1983), Richie and Hanna (1984), Riedel and Tway (1990), Robinson and others (1987), Schultz and others (1988), Sciple (1991a,b), Shafer (1991), Smith (1984), Smith and Baker (1983), Stanley (1990), Stock (1987), Stout (1985), Summers (1989, 1990a,b, and 1991a,b), Swartout (1983), Tanimoto (1987), Walker (1987, 1988), Waterman (1986), Weiss and Kulikowski (1984), Winston (1984), and Zivy (1984).
Overview articles by Schaub (1989), Fang, Shultz, and Chen (1986), and Charland (1988) in Appendix A of this report describe in non-technical terms how expert systems should, and do, work. These general articles cite many interesting interdisciplinary uses of expert systems. Lastly, magazines, such as AI Expert and CIS World, plus periodicals, such as The Knowledge Engineering Review (quarterly, Cambridge University Press), Artificial Intelligence, IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers) Computer, and The International Journal of Geographic Information Systems (quarterly begin-
10

ning in 1987, Taylor & Francis, Ltd., New York) all provide broad perpectives on developing expert systems and the rapidly changing developments in the fields of artificial intelligence and knowledge engineering.
Essentially, the knowledge engineer uses interviews and other methods to extract and document the special knowledge of human experts. Using convergent thinking, "if-then", "yes-no", or "true-false" rules are applied to input and followed to a single decision or conclusions matching those that a human expert would provide. Expert systems can combine traditional procedures with heuristic rules, cross-plots, uncertainty handling, judgment-making, pattern-matching, and Bayesian inference. These expert systems can use their hypothetical reasoning to pursue multiple scenarios in order to find the best solution and to compare, contrast, and rank the advantages of each.
Rule-based reasoning is more powerful than structured query language, and rules can be linked into a reasoning network containing a complex logic of experimental investigation that the analyst wishes to pursue automatically (Maidment, D.R., 1990, pers. comm., Univ. of Texas, Austin). This higher level of problem-solving capability in expert systems and greater efficiency in "technology transfer" preclude the need to always write formal reports, or hold a seminar, or rewrite a program every time a resource assessment is mandated. Information is automatically updated and preserved for future generations of scientists. Expert systems also make excellent teaching devices because the user/rule-writer is forced to identify the processes required for hydrocarbons, for example, to accumulate and then ask the right questions. The program becomes a consultant to future users. Mistakes, such as creating excessively large hydrocarbon plays or geologically diverse plays, would be minimized.
Petroleum geologists and computer scientists in academia and industry have been developing expert systems for years. Examples of several applications include: data analysis of oil well logging tools (Rauch-Hindin, 1985), prospecting (Maslyn, 1986), sedimentary environment/facies interpretation (Shultz and others, 1986; Shultz and others, 1988; and, Stout, 1986), selection of reservoir models, wireline log interpretation (pattern recognition), drilling engineering, well testing, and formation damage analysis (Denton, Kuo, and Startzman, 1989). Dae-Kyo Cheong (1990) has written a Ph.D. dissertation at the University of South Carolina which incorporated a knowledge-based expert system to characterize hydrocarbon fields. The BEICIP Corporation of Rueil-Malmaison, France, has developed three commercially-available software programs (MATOIL, GENEX, and TEMISPACK) that provide an integrated quantitative basin analysis. These programs determine the hydrocarbon-generation potential of basins by analyzing subsidence, thermal history, gas-oil ratios, explusion, and timing of entrapment. Lastly, R.M. Maslyn (consultant, Denver, CO) has written an expert system called EXPLOR...
"that enhances prospect generation by providing an initial set of prospect leads. The leads, developed using exploration rules,
11

from petroleum geologists, are evaluated by geologists, and with further work can become drillable prospects. The program's mapping portion is written in a high-level procedural language to optimize gridding and contouring. A backward-chaining Prologbased expert system generates prospect leads. Input data include well locations, status, target information structure values, secondary formation structure values used for isopaching, target shows, geologic environment, and the targeted exploration feature's average size. Output includes structural leads with 3and 4-way closure, stratigraphic leads, and leads derived from indirect evidence, such as downward projected structure and favorable isopach trends. Prospect leads are output with graphic symbols on a map, and an accompanying printout details individual prospect leads." (Denton, Kuo, and Startzman, 1989).
SOME DEVELOPMENTS OF EXPERT SYSTEMS, INCLUDING THOSE BY THE U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
Expert systems are not "new." They began evolving in the late 1970's and early 1980's from other computer programs used for geologic model creation and for statistical analysis, e.g., the Kriging process as explained in Clark (1982), Cubitt and Henley (1978), Davis (1986), and Verly and others (1984). During this time period, the U.S. Geological Survey supported scientific research that developed and utilized these early interactive computer programs for assessing undiscovered mineral resources (see Finch, 1980; Kork, 1981; McCammon, 1980 and 1982; McCammon and Agterberg, 1982; McCammon, Botbol, Clark, Sinding-Larsen, and Olson, 1978). Perhaps 12-15 years ago expert systems research was avante-garde at such laboratories as Stanford Research Institute, and programming-intensive programs for mineral resource assessment were being written, such as PROSPECTOR (Alty and Coombs, 1984; Campbell, Hollister, Duda, and Hart, 1982; Duda, 1980 and 1981a,b; Duda, Hart, Nilsson, Reboh, Slocum, and Sutherland, 1977; Duda and others, 1978; Duda and Reboh, 1984; Gaschnig, 1981 and 1982a,b; Hart, Duda, and Einaudi, 1978; Maslyn, 1986; McCammon, 1983, 1984 and 1990; McCammon and others, 1984; and, Reboh, 1981). The U.S. Geological Survey began publishing articles on PROSPECTOR in the early 1980's.
According to these authors, a prototype system was developed that evaluated the mineral resources of five major tectonostratigraphic terranes in parts of Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont, against the five models that were constructed. Each of the models consisted of a rule-based method for evaluating the likelihood of occurrence of one or more ore deposits. PROSPECTOR combined both Bayesian and fuzzy logic techniques. (Fuzzy logic in general utilizes such statements as "very likely", "maybe", and "probably not".) The program incorporated the knowledge of 26 types of mineral deposits. It ascertained additional information from the user and then classified and assessed the mineral potential. The total effort devoted to PROSPECTOR was about 30 man-years, but Fox (1984) stated that it, "is reputed to have paid for its development many times over from mineral deposits that it located."
12

Campbell and others (1982) and Waterman (1986) have claimed that PROSPECTOR identified the location of a previously unknown ore-grade mineralization (molybdenum deposit) in a partially explored area of Washington. This appears to be the first ore body find using a computer-based expert approach. Maslyn (1986), however, noted that the deposit, although hidden, was suspected. Walker (1987) noted that:
"the PROSPECTOR program accurately predicted the location of a mineral deposit missed by human experts in over 60 years of searching."
PROSPECTOR has also been used in oil and gas exploration (Fritz, 1985). Fritz mentioned in her article that John Stout of Petroleum Information, Denver, CO, used the microcomputer program (expert system shell) to build a model of world economic rules for oil and gas exploration; the model gives the best estimates of a basin's undiscovered resources and oil and gas economics of the area and the explorationist can then be on the way toward finding the first hydrocarbon prospect. Miller (1986a), based on the PROSPECTOR model, designed a feasible system called muPETROL which used basin analogs that forecast petroleum potential. She stated that:
"The techniques involved provide new insights into the logic for defining more explicit geologic concepts and reasoning relative to an understanding of the global tectonics and geologic nature of sedimentary basins."
With the earliest Survey efforts, scientists were painstakingly inventing the tools of artificial intelligence/expert systems and decision analysis; later they could experiment with real-world applications. Dick McCammon, John Kork, and Nancy Bridges of the U.S. Geological Survey have used geologic decision analysis to obtain preliminary quantitative estimates of the undiscovered uranium resources for the Grants Mineral Belt area in the San Juan basin of northwestern New Mexico. They applied their genetic, regional-scale model to test data gathered by their colleagues. Krystinik and Clifton (1985) published results of an expert system that interpreted sedimentary environments. At the Fourth USGS Artificial Intelligence Special Interest Group (AISIG) meeting, April, 1988, in Reston, Virginia, attendees heard lectures on 12 major expert systems projects currently underway in the Survey (TIC TALK, July-Aug., 1988, Technology Information Center, p. 6-7); applications ranged from geophysics to mapping to basin analysis.
Some rather impressive commercially-available programs quickly superceded the early Survey labor-intensive attempts. Software companies saw the need in American business and science and hurried to develop their own. A major advantage of commercial software is that their software is continuously upgraded and improved. Some of the share-ware (e.g., Lightwave Consultants, 1985; Thurber, 1987) and off-the-shelf commercial programs currently available range from very simple public domain (shareware) inference engine/decision-tree
13

inquiry programs to sophisticated professional programs that can "learn" as they iteratively acquire and process complicated information (see Hinton, 1992, and van Camp, 1992).
Neural network software (Caudill, 1987, 1988; Stanley, 1990), or artificial neural networking (Summers, 1991b), or structured connectionist networks (Feldman and Ballard, 1982; Feldman, Fanty, Goddard, and Lynne, 1988) simulates biological intelligence (Caudell, 1992; Feldman, 1985). Neural networking is also referred to as parallel distributed processing where many linked computational processes spread over many scales are synchronized. Such software is good at predicting trends, recognizing patterns (e.g., Widrow and Winter, 1988), and making generalizations. This type of computer processing is a powerful adjunct to expert systems and could be incorporated into the expert system developed to assess hydrocarbon potential. Neural nets "learn" from example, that is, they are self-teaching from trial and error experience, whereas expert systems reason (see Hertz, Krogh, and Palmer, 1991; and, Hinton, 1985.).
Two nice features about neural networks are: they do not have to be programmed, and they can cross-correlate thousands of variables. On the other hand, neural networks cannot explain the reasoning process. Neural networks, because they resemble the layered neuron network in the human brain, are good at solving problems that humans can easily solve. Stanley (1990), however, points out that a complicated neural network program may have 325 neurons and 20,000 connections, but the human brain has about one hundred billion neurons and ten million billion connections; in other words, one human brain is roughly equivalent to all of the personal computers ever built. For comparison of human brains and computers, see the articles by Searle (1990) and Churchland and Churchland (1990).
If a commercially-available neural network program were utilized, i.e., set up and tested for a small oil-producing area of the Geological Survey's northern Arizona assessment area, one could train it to look at surrounding areas within the northern Arizona province and adjacent Paradox basin and San Juan basin provinces for other potential hydrocarbon plays. Neural nets can handle fuzzy variables; they can build new rules as the system "learns" by studying the past. Networks are useful tools in finding obscure relationships in imperfect or noisy data (Summers, 1990b). According to Summers (1991b), "Another plus is that neural networks can operate under adverse circumstances. Just as you can sometimes recognize a face even if partially covered by a hat, neural networks can sometimes work even if information is missing or contradictory information is present, allowing workable solutions to be found, in some cases, under nonoptimal conditions."
In 1987 Materna related, "The long-promised age of machines that can understand speaker-independent continuous speech, recognize images, learn from their environment, adaptively change to new circumstances and automatically operate in the real world may now be dawning." Nearly all newly developed application-software have neural nets embedded in them. In fact, at this time, the application of
14

neural networks is demanding greater popularity than large-scale artificial intelligence efforts (Penn, 1991). The neural networks technology is having the effect of reducing operating costs and increasing productivity in American business and industry.
Inexpensive ($200-800) commercial neural networks are available that handle expert systems (Dvorak, 1989; Middlewood, 1991), e.g., BRAINMAKER vers. 2.1 (California Scientific Software, Grass Valley, CA), and NEUROSHELL (Ward Systems Group, Inc., Frederick, MD). Some commercial expert systems include: EXPLORENET 3000 (HNC, Inc., San Diego, CA), CxPERT (Software Plus, Crofton, MD), KNOWLEDGEPRO, LEVEL 5, PERSONAL CONSULTANT EASY, and SYMBOLOGIC ADEPT: REDEFINING EXPERT SYSTEMS (Symbologic, Redmond, WA). More expensive ($1,000-2,000) expert systems are available that run on all platforms, e.g., IBM PC/XT/AT, are EXPERT-EASE (Perrone & Associates, Inc., San Francisco, CA), 1ST CLASS (AI Corp, Waltham, MA), and NEURALWORKS PROFESSIONAL II (Neural Ware, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA.
Programs such as these, and those listed below, have liberated Survey scientists from "re-inventing the wheel"; the scientist "expert" now only needs to pull his/her development tool off the shelf and follow the cookbook. The user simply writes the rules, and for neural networks, tells the program what to learn. Brody (1989) has commented that:
"In the days before commercial expert system shells, people built their own from scratch, usually using an artificial intelligence language like Lisp or Prolog. Building the entire expert system usually required at least three people: the ^domain expert', whose area of expertise was being milked for the project; the ^knowledge engineer', who built a rule tree on paper based on interviews with the domain expert; and the programmer, who actually constructed the expert program."
Eric Summers (U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Division, Reston, VA) has characterized some commercial, general purpose expert systems as follows (many are owned by the U.S.G.S.):
KES II - applies rules, HT (hypothesis testing), and Bayesian logic. It runs on PC, VAX, IBM mainframe, and Unisys systems. Cost is $4,000-40,000 depending on interface.
VP-EXPERT - can do only backward chaining with rules and runs on IBM PC/XT/AT. Cost is $100-250.
KEE (knowledge expert environment) and ART (artificial reasoning technology) - hybrid systems with frames, rules, and instances. They run under Common Lisp on Symbolics, TI, and 386-class 32 bit desktops; Cost is $70,000-80,000. KEE is available on the U.S. Geological Survey's CIS Lab SUN artificial intelligence system.
KEYSTONE, NEXPERT, and GOLDWORKS - systems with frames, rules, and instances. They do perhaps 70-80 percent of functions of the KEE and ART systems, but at 10 percent of their cost. They run on Unix, 80386, 68020 desktops and use Lisp. Cost is about $10,000.
As a point of information, the difference between forward-chain-
15

ing and backward-chaining is the difference between deductive and inductive reasoning, respectively. In forward-chaining all rules are fired/tested in the knowledge base and the system determines as many conclusions or truths as possible. The system knows everything about everything because it looks at the whole model, and it keeps cycling through all the rules. For example, given a certain set of medical signs and symptoms, what disease is likely to be present? In backward-chaining all the rules are not fired/tested, i.e., the system assumes the truth of a goal and tries to prove it. It asks the minimal number of questions in looking only for a particular thing (goal-oriented). In backward-chaining the program works backward from a goal to determine what knowledge is necessary to prove that a goal is true. There is no difference in forward- or backward-chaining if all the goals are determined. An example of backward-chaining is the process one goes through when buying a new car. The person knows what s/he wants (the rules) in terms of color, style, make, price, performance, etc. S/he now must search all the new car dealers (knowledge base/database) in the United States to find exactly where the car is located that exactly matches the requirements.
Caudill (1990) and Summers (1991a) have written technical reviews of another professional expert system. Their evaluations are for the MAHOGANY Professional expert system shell by Emerald Intelligence of Ann Arbor, MI. Summers (1991a) stated:
"MAHOGANY runs on a variety of equipment including IBM AT and Apple Mac II. The version I used runs on the Apple Mac II, costs $495, and requires 1 MB of RAM and 1 MB of disk storage space. MAHOGANY is an object-oriented expert system shell that supports classes with multiple inheritance and forward- and backwardchaining reasoning capabilities. Included are a rule and object editor and a set of example knowledge bases to help the beginner learn how to use expert systems. A 1-day training class at Ann Arbor is offered by Emerald Intelligence and will be necessary for most first-time knowledge base developers."
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (CIS) IN EXPERT SYSTEMS
Intelligent Geographic Information Systems (CIS) can be one of the tools of an expert system, just as the use of neural networks (described above) can be a powerful component. Miller (1988, 1989) of the Office of Energy and Marine Geology, Reston, VA, and Miller, Latzke, and Schachte (1990) have been using CIS and artifical intelligence/expert systems techniques to develop a prototype knowledge-based system for the three-dimensional analysis of the San Juan basin of southwestern Colorado and northwestern New Mexico. Their focus to date is on constructing isopach and structure maps of the four major hydrocarbon reservoirs and over-laying production and GIS maps a 3-D modeling of what is already known. This work, although a monumental first effort in using the available computer technology, does not by itself predict new reservoir formations, i.e., deeper unexplored reservoirs/plays. Their geologic information is primarily from the tens-of-thousands of San Juan basin wells encoded in the Well History
16

Control System (noted in next chapter). They are using NEXPERT OBJECT software which is also described below. According to Miller:
"The major objectives of the project are to explore the feasibility of applying (1) CIS digital mapping techniques to integrate and manipulate spatial and attribute data, combining complex data sets (geographical, geological, and geophysical databases) into resultant overlay maps for multivariate exploratory data analysis, and (2) expert systems techniques that simulate the logic of basin experts to model geologic concepts, to document and analyze geologic attributes, and to interpret the history of a sedimentary basin."
Software programs that manage, integrate, analyze, solve problems, and produce maps from CIS spatial databases for field-size exploration areas have already been developed and tested. Examples are summarized in Bonham-Carter (1992), Leonard and Fried (1989), Leonard, Fried, and Milam (1989), and Seller, 1991.
The age of the merger of CIS and the expert system has arrived. According to Leonard, Fried, and Milam (1989),
"One thing is clear: CIS technology has real application to the petroleum industry, but its potential has not yet been realized." Maggio (1988) has commented that such a merger of CIS and expert systems, "Will provide a land-based resource management tool that will allow the manager and researcher to take advantage of both. The CIS can serve as a spatially-referenced data base management system which supplies and stores data needed in the simulation modeling component of the expert system." Miller, Latzke, and Schachte (1990) concluded, "CIS technology can provide new analytical tools for innovative research in geological interpretation, for updating information data bases, and for developing new concepts in basin analysis and resource appraisal methodology."
With respect to GIS's capability, Cartwright and Leonard (1990) have stated,
"Explorations geologists and geophysicists deal with data that is inherently spatial. They are concerned with the coincidence and interdependence of important geological features. It is important not only that these features exist, but also where they exist and in what relation to their surroundings. The GIS's ability to combine various layers of data and apply spatial operators to the data is well-suited to finding zones for potential exploration.
The CIS may be used as a tool to integrate information from disparate sources into a common frame of reference. Hardcopy maps in various scales, tabular information, digital products and image data from aircraft and satellites all are required by the explorers: the CIS will incorporate various data into a single database with a common registration and coordinate system. Once this geographic data is integrated, the CIS not only assists the explor-
17

ationists in the search for known patterns, but may even reveal new spatial relationships that were previously indistinguishable.
One of the features that distinguishes a CIS from a simple mapping system is the GIS's ability to associate specific attributes with various spatial features. This ability is absolutely vital to petroleum because there are so many attributes and tabular data associated with well locations and seismic lines. The exploration professional must be able to generate sophisticated queries on the attributes in a database and display the matching features graphically. Wells, pipelines and boundaries also must be able to be shown with different symbols or colors depending on a particular attribute."
Computer scientists working in the U.S. Geological Survey Rocky Mountain Mapping Center, Branch of Research, Technology, & Applications (Central Region's CIS Lab, building 25, Denver Federal Center), can assist with the undertaking of the geologist's digital mapping, modeling, or data integration problems and apply state-ofthe-art CIS/expert "synergistic" systems solutions (AI Applications, 1989; Soller and others, 1990). For example, network bridges or interfaces have been written between ISM/IVM (interactive surface modeling/interactive volume modeling) and ARC/INFO. ARC/INFO is a CIS that automates, manipulates, interprets, and illustrates geographic information (database-oriented mapping). The Information Systems Division of the U.S. Geological Survey (Ferrigno, 1990, January, Developments) has written a review on the CIS TUTOR software available in the Reston Technology Information Center. For in-depth information about CIS, consult Antenucci and others (1991), Federal Interagency Coordinating Committee on Digital Cartography (1988), Geographic Information Systems World (1990), Peuquet and Marble (1990), and Ripple (1987). Many other CIS articles are cited in the selected references. Petroleum Information Corporation of Denver, CO, uses CIS software called VOYAGER. VOYAGER is an interface to ARC/INFO which manages disparate oil and gas databases.
According to Miller, Latzke, and Schachte (1990), ARC/INFO...
"..is built around a hybrid data model that organizes geographic data using a relational and topological model. This facilitates efficient handling of two generic classes of spatial data: locational data, describing the location and topology of point, line and area features; and attribute data, describing characteristics of these features. Locational data are simply structured with cartographic X,Y coordinate data to identify arc, node, and polygon relationships."
ISM/IVM is currently the most popular mapping program in the Branch of Petroleum Geology. In 1990 it was thought that an ARC/INFO - ISM/IVM interface would probably be available by the end of calendar year 1991, but its future is now doubtful (T.R. Vogel, 1992, personal communication, U.S. Geological Survey, National Mapping GIS Lab). Vogel is developing the specifications of an interface for a prototype expert system (see AI Applications, 1989). This system will analyze
18

groundwater quality. What has already been learned in this effort can be directly transferred to resource assessment expert systems.
Another useful interface, between NEXPERT OBJECT vers. 2.0 (Ballou, 1990; Neuron Data, Inc., 1989; Johnson, 1989; Lisker, 1989; Nordwall, 1989; and Rasmus, 1989) and ARC/INFO, is currently being built. NEXPERT OBJECT (Pallatto, 1989) may be the software shell of choice in my opinion for any initial investigations into actual implementation of expert systems by the Branch of Petroleum Geology. This expert system includes a unified database bridge that allows users access to many databases, such as ORACLE, RDB, INGRES, and SYBASE, and lets them create SQL (structured c[uery language) queries (Fox, 1990) to non-SQL flat files residing in LOTUS or EXCEL spreadsheets.
NEXPERT OBJECT software is one of the most powerful and comprehensive expert system development tools presently available. Knowledge, in the form of understandable rules, can be used to prove hypotheses (backward chaining) or to draw conclusions from data (forward chaining). The same knowledge can be used in both reasoning modes. The structure of the data and the sequence and relationships of the rules can be graphically depicted. Its rule structure permits parallel thinking and cross-connection of hypotheses from different parts of a problem in a way not readily accomplished in procedural programming languages. More importantly, compared to a programming language like C, NEXPERT OBJECT is more understandable and easier to use for programming rules. This shell runs on DOS, OS/2, and Macintosh networks. The architecture enables users to access other expert system databases on LAN file servers, Sun Microsystems workstations, Digital Equipment minicomputers, Apple Computers, and IBM mainframes. Summers (1990) of the U.S. Geological Survey's Information Resources Management office has written a technical review of the NEXPERT OBJECT software.
ARC/INFO developed by ESRI (Environmental Systems Research Institute, Boulder, CO) is a command line driven system licensed by the U.S. Geological Survey. Hardware platforms supported include mini-computer, workstation, and PC. Operating systems supported include PRIMOS, UNIX, VMS, and DOS. Data are imported from digital formats such as DLG (digital line graphics), DEM (digital elevation models), DTED, SIF, DXF, DIME, TIGER, and IGES.
According to ESRI, their product is a complete CIS (geographic information system) with capabilities of data input, processing, analysis, output, and management. ARC/INFO is a vector-based CIS which uses an arc-node topologically structured data format to store coordinate data. Attribute data is stored in INFO (a relational database management system) data files which are integrated with the coordinate and topological data files. ESRI has a separate software product called GRID/GRIDTOPO for manipulating and analyzing raster data. ARC/INFO has conversion routines for reading and writing ESRI's and ERDAS's (Earth Resources DATA Analysis System) raster data files. The ESRI/ERDAS live link capability allows simultaneous display of ARC/INFO vector data on ERDAS raster image data on an ERDAS
19

display monitor. Workstation versions of ARC/INFO ver. 5.01 allow simultaneous display of ARC/INFO vector data on a number of raster data formats.
The ARC/INFO software is capable of contouring, transforming projections, and performing spatial analysis. Output devices include Tek Ink Jet, Tek Thermal, CalComp Electro, CalComp Pen, and Matrix Camera. Finally, ARC/INFO interfaces with ERDAS, GRASS (geographic analysis support system an easy to learn rule-based processor), SPANS (spatial analysis), and GSMAP ver. 7.0 (a Survey-writ ten mapping/illustration program by Gary Seiner, Denver Federal Center).
SOME GOVERNMENT DATABASES ACCESSIBLE FOR PETROLEUM RESOURCE ASSESSMENT
Two-hundred twenty-three databases owned by the U.S. Geological Survey have been described in circular 817. Many databases have been added since this circular was published in 1979; its revision in 1983 described 311 major databases and files. Of course not all these databases have relevancy to petroleum resource assessment, and my guess is that they are woefully under-utilized and some probably suffer from lack of quality control. Mankin (1991) reported that his committee found weaknesses in the databases used by the U.S. Geological Survey in its most recent assessment; for example, more seismic data needs to be incorporated into the evaluation of potential plays. The Geological Survey does, however, maintain a library of multichannel seismic data in its National Energy Research Seismic Library in Denver, Colorado (Hutchinson, Taylor, and Zihlman, 1990; Taylor, 1992).
Presently, the Information Systems Division (ISD) of the U.S. Geological Survey (National Center, Reston, VA) is collecting information on databases from industry, academia, and all levels of state and federal governmental agencies. Its steadily growing directory, called the Earth Science Data Directory (ESDD), has about 2400 databases referenced (as of June, 1991) of which about 170 can be accessed through the Survey. The data is available on the AMDAHL 5890 mainframe computer and on CD-ROM by subscription from a nonprofit library service organization. ISD is continually looking for contributors to its directory. Natural resource data include computerized indices, files, hard copy records, maps, and files.
Three kinds of petroleum databases are described by Pearson and Ellwood (1987). They list 66 online databases of which most are of the actual data type; the remainder are of a bibliographic and textual type.
Additionally, many databases not included in the above noted U.S. Geological Survey circulars have been constructed either manually or with digitizers by individual Survey scientists. No one probably really knows how many databases have been developed by individuals for their own use, as opposed to technical service projects (TSPs) developed through contract with business (e.g., Petroleum Information, Corp.). Or for that matter, no one may really know how many revised
20

and cleaned-up searchable databases could be available if there were a comprehensive master list. The various state geological surveys also have databases that can be accessed, e.g. see Reynolds and Trapp (1986) for databases in Arizona. The National Geophysical Data Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (U.S. Department of Commerce) in Boulder, CO, offers a vide array of database products and services. It sells products covering over 50 disciplines. Those solid-earth geophysical databases applicable to searching by expert systems include aeromagnetics, gravity, seismic reflection and refraction, geothermics, geochemistry, remote sensing, geographic boundaries, topography, and veil logs. Another Department of Commerce agency, the Information Resources and Services Division of the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Gaithersburg, MD, has published descriptions of hundreds of databases, many of vhich relate to earth science, geology, geophysics, and petroleum (Cunningham, 1990).
Many Geological Survey Branches have such indigenous data in formats not readily useable by others in the federal government. Some of these databases are not available even as open-file reports. Getting databases reformatted into manipulatable files is perhaps one of the inevitable obstacles to greater appreciation and usage of the information by the end-user geologist. However, some common microcomputer spreadsheet softvare programs, such as LOTUS and QUATTRO, and EXCEL are capable of restructuring databases (Varney, 1992).
Many of the newer large databases (technical services retrievals) have been purchased from Petroleum Information Corporation, Denver, CO, Oklahoma University (Petroleum Data Systems), and consultants such as Richard Nehring. These are down-loaded custom-designed databases specific to petroleum resource assessment problems. Databases include the NRG Associates Significant Oil and Gas Field File which contains data on approximately 10,000 oil and gas fields in the United States, and the Petroleum Geochemistry File (OGDB) which contains data covering rock-eval, isotope, gas analysis and chromotography, organic mass spectrometry, vitrinite reflectance, and hydrous pyrolysis analyses. Hutchinson (1976), Takahashi, Dyman, and Magoon (1983), and the National Research Council (1988) discuss these and other data systems (and their management) which are most frequently used by petroleum geologists in the U.S. Geological Survey.
The U.S. Geological Survey also maintains other digital databases on specific basins, such as the Powder River basin, the Paradox basin, the Uinta basin, and the Denver basin. Information types include porosity, permeability, vitrinite reflectance, drill stem tests, pressure and flow, and stratigraphy. A database called GAS_ANALYSIS containing 30,000 gas sample analyses and 44 variables is available from the U.S. Bureau of Mines.
One of the more important databases for resource assessment is the WHCS (Well History Control System) developed by Petroleum Information Corporation, Denver, CO. Detailed information on more than 2.2 million wells in the United States resides in this database. Over 2.4 million well logs and 7.0 million formation tops are available from
21

Petroleum Information. Customized retrievals can be procured from the WHCS, and all data can be down-loaded onto PC diskettes. Under contract, Petroleum Information can also supply such products as base maps, digitized topographic maps (7 1/2 degree quadrangles and others of smaller scale), structure maps, lease-ownership maps, field maps, geographic analysis investigation maps, fracture/porosity maps, hydrocarbon distribution maps, lithologic trend maps, seismic data, coalbed methane exploration activity data, hydrocarbon play maps, production data, drilling activity data, satellite imagery maps, bibliographic information, and so on. The only limit to the Survey's acquisition of these off-the-shelf and customized retrievals is its ability to pay for them.
Personnel in the Information Systems Division of the U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, VA, can provide computer users with information about all Survey databases, services, and facilities. They publish a monthly bulletin, Developments, promulgating their information resources which includes product reviews, ADP acquisition, training, personnel contacts in all U.S. Geological Survey facilities, and other vital links between computers and scientists. The Technology Information Center in building 53, Denver Federal Center, provides a similar service and publishes Tic Talk as their vehicle of information exchange.
HOW ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS MIGHT BE USED FOR HYDROCARBON PLAY ANALYSIS
Resource assessment work is an inexact science and always will be until all petroleum has finally been produced. And, no one will ever know precisely when that will happen. Thus, it is not surprising that some of the above noted assessments (methodology section) are sometimes confusing or misinterpreted (National Research Council, 1975) and controversial; the reliability of such assessments (...and effectiveness of exploration used by industry) have been questioned, labeled as biased, and met with less than enthusiastic responses (e.g., see Century, 1980; Cochran, 1986; Douglas, 1974; Gillette, 1975; Hayes, 1979; Kerr, 1989; Mankin, 1991; Menard and Sharman (1975); North, 1978; Parent and Linden, 1975; Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists, 1981; Schantz, 1978; Steinhart and Bultman, 1983; Time Magazine, 1978; Warman, 1971; and, Wilson, 1973). Mankin (1991), in his report for the National Reseach Council, noted that in the 1989 national assessment by the Department of the Interior, there was "an absence of a clearly defined assessment procedure that was unambiguously understood by all members of the assessment team." That report also concluded, "The USGS management had provided insufficient manpower, funds, and incentives to carry out a national oil and gas assessment at a uniform level of excellence in all dimensions."
There is no doubt that explaining and defending assessment methodology with expert systems will lend more objectivity for those who wonder how assessment numbers are generated. Petroleum assessments must be an ongoing process by teams of scientists who spend most of their time doing resource assessments it should not be a spor-
22

adic, high-intensity, eleventh-hour effort that inconveniences the assessors who would rather be conducting other research. In the absence of a permanent U.S. Geological Survey team, the application of expert systems to assessment work would supply the essential continuity that excellence and credibility demand.
For over 80 years the U.S. Geological Survey has been accumulating data and knowledge on the occurrence of hydrocarbons in the United States (U.S. Geological Survey, 1980)...it is the leader of the national expertise which studies resources (not reserves). However, the time is at hand when all of this knowledge needs to be aggregated into interactive computer repositories. Petroleum assessment is a task begging for a greater utilization of expert systems. If implemented, a coordinated strategy to characterize the petroleum potential of ALL of the United States (not just all federal lands, or all Indian Reservations, or all hydrocarbon plays, or all wilderness areas, et cetera) could prove highly efficacious by reducing total man-hours and by producing greater compatibility among provinces. When one compares the published literature on expert systems theory and applications, the conclusion is evident that the U.S. Geological Survey is probably several years behind the rest of the world in using "the modern genre of user-friendly" expert systems to assess petroleum resources.
Expert systems can: 1) manipulate a large number of variables at once, 2) lend themselves to the automation of qualitative criteria to reach valid conclusions, and 3) rapidly output graphics. There is a wealth of important multivariate spatial data about specific geographic/sedimentary basins that is in great demand on a daily basis. Management of this information is of paramount importance; it can be accomplished using expert systems a logical next step in the refinement of the science we are charged with doing. Expected results from an expert system developed to assess an area might be a series of composite maps showing the probability distributions and estimated field sizes for specified fractiles. Undoubtedly, new concepts of petroleum occurrence will also be developed.
Every square mile of the United States has some (...however small) petroleum potential it's just a matter of degree... being defined by current economics and politics, and being able to put limits on the problem. In defining a petroleum play one must put his/her "best-guess" geographic boundaries on it according to the operational definition of a play at any point in time; i.e., the condition might exist that all plays shall contain at least 1.0 million barrels of oil. It stands to reason that given the same or additional subsurface information, any of the non-play areas in the year 1992 may become a play in another assessor's opinion. This may be particularly true 25, 250, or even 25,000 years from now. So why not go ahead and assess the "non-play" areas now?; there is no adverse consequence if we are dealing with probabilities.
In the "art and science" of Search and Rescue, the technique of continuously assessing the "probability of detection" is termed "shifting probabilities" (see Shea, 1988). This is done after an important clue is found by a field team, or if the mission coordinator
23

accepts the presumption, or finds hard evidence, that the victim/lost person may be moving from one search sector to another. As search teams return to mission base, their estimates of "probability of detection" per their sector are factored into a new "moving probability". A field team that does not find any clues in their assigned sector will be cause to reassess the probability of detection based on this "negative information". As one can see, time can be an important factor in the assessment process. Whether the problem is assessing where a lost person may be found, or where new resources may be discovered, as information, positive or negative, is received, realtime estimates can be easily revised using computer programs. Because few geologists can accurately predict what the ecomomics of exploration, price-cost ratios, public demand, et cetera, will be 100 or more years from now, expert systems afford advantages by being able to routinely guide and generate "shifting probabilities" (resource assessments).
I am certain that many geologists have wondered about the rhetorical questions, "Is that Precambrian outcrop hiding a petroliferous basin beneath a thrust sheet?",...(see Cries, 1983), or "Is there oil under that volcanic field?"...(see Shirley, 1985), or "Will hydrocarbons be preserved at 30,000-foot drilling depths in that basin?", or "Did that oil really migrate 200 miles updip?", or "Are there other 20 million barrel fields in northeastern Arizona producing from igneous rocks?" ...(see McKenny and Masters, 1968 and 1970), or "Should the Late Proterozoic Chuar Group source rocks of northern Arizona be identified as a petroleum play?" (see Desborough and others, 1984; Lambert, 1989; Murray, 1965; P'an, 1982; Pawlewicz and Palacas, 1992; Rauzi, 1992; and, Reynolds and others, 1988). The rules in expert systems can be written to accomodate uncertainties, such as these possibilities.
To understand the simple strategy suggested in this open-file report, we can assume that the population of the United States represents the total set of objects which we wish to analyze for marketing purposes. Just as oil and gas accumulations have many attributes, the general population has many characterizing attributes contained in databases that marketing experts analyze to target specific groups for specific products. Information residing in these computer files contains such attributes as marital status, occupation, family dwelling type, annual income, type of credit card(s), number and age of family members, highest educational level, type and year of car(s) driven, number of cats/dogs as pets, magazine subscriptions, types of vacations taken, brands of food eaten, number of times per month a video is rented, residing in urban/rural/bedroom community, hobbies enjoyed, types of appliances owned, and so on.
The hydrocarbon assessment/potential problem is likewise broken down into defining various combinations of attributes into subsets, i.e., everybody has a five or nine digit mailing zip code that serves to delineate mail distribution boundaries. In highly successful micromarketing techniques, attributes are aggregated according to mailing zip code, and each zip code is characterized according to, let's say, 100 attributes. The product being marketed is targeted to
24

only specific zip codes. But, instead of mailing zip codes, geologic zip codes could be defined in the expert system by using rules to search out the information required in the diversity of geologic databases.
Each state of the U.S. may have from several to as many as 50 unique geologic areas that could be assigned "geologic zip codes", and that can be characterized according to their attributes of total thickness of basin strata or depth to basement, thickness of each stratigraphic unit, age of oldest sedimentary strata, thermal maturity and total organic carbon of source rocks, distance from nearest oil production, clastic to carbonate ratio of the statigraphic section, relative age of traps, types of folds, traps, and seals, degree of post-trap faulting, and so on. In place of the 136 onshore petroleum provinces assessed (Mast and others, 1989), the geologic attributes of perhaps 1,000 "geologic zip codes" can and should be profiled for the United States. It is just a matter of time (maybe 10-25 years ?) before this level of data collection is accomplished by the U.S. Geological Survey, regardless of whether or not it is done under the guise of petroleum assessment. Each zip code can eventually have a "probability statement" synthesizing the hydrocarbon potential.
Perhaps the biggest advantage in using expert systems is that the geologic province experts set up uniform databases and write uniform rules that query these databases. A continuum or flow of information is created and passed from one expert to the next over many years. There is no need to start over every time a new national assessment effort is made. Each province expert becomes "an official data custodian" and makes an orderly transfer of this data when he or she changes projects or retires. Therefore, for example, if a U.S. Congressman wants resource information "ASAP" about a small tract of land in his/her state, it is available at the touch of a few computer keys and the traditional "brush fires" and "bombs-with-short-fuses" scenarios are avoided. Use of expert systems forces collection of pertinent data. It forces better organization of data. It forces a logical sequence of analysis. It forces a better end-product. It forces uniformity in thinking. Petroleum assessment will take a step up from the province geologist's "intuitive gut-feeling covert reasoning" (which can be important) to a higher degree of "overt (verifiable and trustable to all future workers) reasoning."
As stated previously, expert systems are NOT a replacement for play analysis, but rather a workable tool to help identify potential hydrocarbon plays. According to Dolton and others (1981) in the play analysis method, "the amount of hydrocarbon in a play or prospect is determined by use of a reservoir engineering equation, taking into account geologic risk factors. Often the input for such variable (such as thickness of reservoir rocks and porosity) of this equation is in the form of a probability distribution that is known or estimated. Monte Carlo methods commonly are used to generate a probability distribution for the amount of hydrocarbon."
The geologic risk factors and the estimation of probability distributions of the above-quoted definition are the key factors being
25

addressed in this report. Expert systems can easily manage and input/output this information in a user-friendly, interactive, mappable form.
LIMITATIONS TO IMPLEMENTATION
According to Waterman (1986), "Building an expert system requires a major investment of time, money, energy, and faith. If the problem is appropriate, and if adequate resources are committed, the investment will be repaid many times over. But even the smoothest development effort will have rough spots. Some of them cannot be avoided." He also states that gathering the resources necessary to enter the expert system arena may pose a significant challenge, e.g., "Personnel competent to design and develop the system are scarce, and few of the high-level support tools and languages are fully developed or reliable. In fact, many of them are new and untested."
And, as with all scientific endeavors, the availability of easily-accessible, cost-effective, high-quality field data determines the value, and hence significance, of the final outcome. The initial data acquisition phase for resource assessment may take, for example, eight to twelve months for an area the size of the San Juan basin, or three to six months for the 930-square-mile Ute Mountain Ute Indian Reservation in southwestern Colorado.
Good database design is essential. The design should be an effective, practical, sharable, and standardized one that may take many months to perfect. Some databases are flat files (two-dimensional, tabular, spreadsheet format) and some are hierarchial (tree-structure) files, such as Petroleum Information's Well History Control System, where many files (e.g., formation tops) can be built per each well's unique API number. Expert systems are presently plagued by the inadequacy of user interfaces that are suppose to tie the myriad of differently structured databases, the inference engine, the graphics and mathematics programs, and the user together. Learning curves will be long unless time and resources are devoted for a central person or group or project or contractor who will be responsible for managing, documenting, structuring, and normalizing the data into compatible formats (relational databases). Currently the Branch of Petroleum Geology uses INGRES as one of its primary relationaldatabase management software. See Date (1983 and 1986) and Fleming and von Halle (1989) for discussions of database design and management.
As with any new computer application, setting up a new expert system with valid rules will be more labor-intensive initially but much less labor-intensive in the intermediate- and long-term. Eventually, if many geologists try to implement expert systems in resource assessment without a master plan or strategy, one problem or limitation that may arise is the agreement on standardized geologic terms, models, and "systems" (see Magoon, 1988b, 1992), i.e., a problem of accepting good operational definitions.
Determination of "geologic zip code" (as described above) or
26

tract/cluster boundaries may be difficult and ambiguous unless the same scientist or group of scientists, for the sake of conformity, determines the boundaries for all "geologic zip codes". The gathering of adequate subsurface data in frontier or partially drilled petroleum provinces is a major concern special rules will need to be written for areas of sparse data. Not all seismic data is public. Some data may be too expensive. All boreholes do not have source-rock (e.g., geochemical Rock Eval) information. Magnetic-telluric data may be too limited geographically, and its interpretation may not be reliable. The list of data limitations could be very long.
Major concerns regarding data accuracy and standardization of multiple databases are real and need to be addressed. This standardization problem is particularly cogent when several layers of data are brought together in one view, such as done in three-dimensional modeling. The training of end-users in order to maintain compatibility among databases is, of course, another concern, but one which is manageable. Some province geologists who are unfamiliar with hands-on computer applications may resist the "conversion of their data" to a standardized/computerized form. The unglamorous task of collecting and digitizing data simply takes time!
Pellerin (1990) relates, "CIS integrates hardware, software and data..... And integration is the primary stumbling block for federal agencies, which use a mind-boggling array of different hardware and software for equally diverse applications. Like it or not, it appears that federal standards for operating systems, user interfaces, networking, programming languages, data, and virtually all other aspects of computing are in the future, and they will affect CIS technology substantially."
The application of expert systems to petroleum resource appraisal (play analysis) should be initiated and tested in a restricted geographic area where there is a known occurrence of petroleum and where extrapolation of what is learned can be easily achieved and then translated to surrounding less- or non-productive areas. A small test area will also allow practice and proficiency in writing VALID RULES and decision-tree logic structures; disagreement could arise over what is valid per the particular geologic setting (but, that is to be expected in science). Lastly, heuristic searches/logic are important in order to limit the combinatorial explosions that are possible.
HYPOTHETICAL EXAMPLE OF A PROTOTYPE RULE-BASED SYSTEM
Northern Arizona is a good example of a moderately-small test area for developing an expert system to assess hydrocarbon potential; i.e., it is smaller than the entire petroleum province by the same name currently used by the U.S. Geological Survey. This area is that part of the Colorado Plateau north of about 35 N. latitude and between west longitudes 109 to almost 114 (Grand Wash fault). There is a wide diversity of structural features and stratigraphic pinchouts. The Black Mesa structural (Laramide) basin overprints the Devonian Oraibi trough. Northern Arizona is a good area because the
27

land-use is diversified (...and an interesting GIS example/problem) having five Indian Reservations plus Bureau of Land Management, state, private, and wilderness lands. Furthermore, four speculative and proven hydrocarbon plays have been identified in this physiographic province (Butler, 1988) and many more have been identified bordering the defined test area.
Although there are many interesting stratigraphic problems to be resolved, the structural geology of northern Arizona's Colorado Plateau is relatively uncomplicated and moderately-well understood (see Baars, 1983; Dott and Batten, 1971; Frazier and Schwimmer, 1987; Hunt, 1956; Kelley, 1955; Mallory, 1972; Nations and Stump, 1981; Thornbury, 1965; and, Wilson, 1962). The 15 "geologic zip codes" include: Shivwits Plateau, Coconino Plateau, Kaibab Plateau, Grand Canyon, Kaibito Plateau, Black Mesa basin, Oraibi Trough, Defiance Uplift, Painted Desert, Paradox basin (Blanding basin southern margin), San Franciso Volcanic Field, Mogollon Slope, Tyende Saddle, northern flank of the Holbrook basin, and Kaibab Arch. Some of these areas overlap, but I foresee no complications with this; in fact, it may provide a beneficial continuity.
Other qualitative and quantitative petroleum "assessments" to use the term in its broadest sense have been conducted in the suggested test area; for example, see: Barwin (1969); Barwin, King, and Hassenfratz (1971); Beikman, Peterson, Huber, and Butler (1986); Brown (1956); Brown and Lauth (1958 and 1961); Conley (1974); Conley and Giardina (1979); Cram (1971); Crawford (1963); Kiersch (1956); McKenny and Masters (1968); Nations, Doss, and Ybarra (1983a,b); Oil and Gas Journal (1979); 0'Sullivan (1969); Peirce (1982); Peirce, Keith, and Wilt (1970); Pye (1961, 1967); Ryder (1983); Turner (1968); and, Wardlaw and Harris (1984).
Production of non-combustible gas (helium) plus both conventional (2 million BBLS and 15 million MCF) and unconventional (20 million BBLS from igneous rocks) oil and gas occurs in northeastern Arizona in the Four Corners area. The proposed test area has experienced moderate exploration in the northeastern part to inadequate exploration elsewhere. Tectonic and structural elements are fairly well defined and the stratigraphy is relatively less complex than in surrounding areas.
If this test area proves to be too large, perhaps a better starting place might be the Ute Mountain Ute Indian Reservation in southwestern Colorado and northwestern New Mexico. The U.S. Geological Survey has conducted special studies, including an oil and gas resource assessment (Butler, 1987), seismic, mapping, hydrologic, mineral and other investigations. A further alternative in reducing the prototype expert system might be to select only one of the "geologic zip codes" noted above.
Any expert system software requires a powerful rule editor because the rules will be constantly modified, added, and deleted as the expert geologist refines his/her thinking as the system grows. The level or certainty of belief that a rule is true (relevancy
28

factor) may also be adjusted. Assuming all databases have been obtained and are in a compatible format, an integrated expert system might be structured in the following manner:
PROBLEM; Assess the undiscovered, economically-recoverable, conventional oil accumulations in YYYYY area which has 12 "geologic zip codes". RF is the relevancy factor, or the "belief factor" of Cheong (1990), which is assigned to each answer. In this hypothetical example, RFs are "just numbers" between 0.0 and 1.0 used for illustrative purposes only. This problem is not intended to be real or to be complete.
STEP 1: Write an expert system that evaluates and characterizes ALL potential reservoirs of "geologic zip code" XXXXXX. Databases M, N, P, X, Y, Z, AA, FF, JJ, QQ, RR, and W will be searched and queried (these are relational normalized databases).
A. Write questions that ask .... for reservoir XYZFM, what is the exploration status and known facts about this formation, i.e., what is the...
probability that this formation is present in the subsurface? If... 1. 0.00 then go to... 2. 0.01-0.24 then go to... 3. 0.25-0.49 then go to... 4. 0.50-0.74 then go to... 5. 0.75-0.94 then go to... 6. 0.95-1.00 then go to...
geographic size of the area being assessed? If... 1. up to 249 square miles, then go to... 2. 250-499 square miles, then go to... 3. 500-999 square miles, then go to... 4. 1,000-1,499 square miles, then go to... 5. 1,500-2,499 square miles, then go to... 6. 2,500-4,999 square miles, then go to... 7. 5,000-9,999 square miles, then go to... 8. 10,000-14,999 square miles, then go to... 9. 15,000 or more square miles, then go to...
percent of the area being assessed that contains the specific reservoir or potential reservoir in the subsurface? If... 1. 1-24, then go to... 2. 25-49, then go to... 3. 50-74, then go to... 4. 75-100, then go to... 5. unknown, then go to...
status of exploration by drilling in this part of the province? If... 1. essentially unexplored; drilling density = 200 square miles or more per borehole,
29

then go to... 2. inadequately explored; drilling density =
50-199 square miles per borehole, then go to... 3. moderately explored; drilling density = 16-49 square miles per borehole, then go to... 4. maturely explored; drilling density = 2-15 square miles per borehole, then go to... 5. very maturely explored; drilling density = up to 2 square miles per borehole, then go to...
percent of boreholes bottoming in depth range below surface. If... 1. 500-999 feet: a. 0-19 % ... RF= xx, and go to... b. 20-39 % ... RF= xx, and go to... c. 40-59 % ... RF= xx, and go to... d. 60-79 % ... RF= xx, and go to... e. 80-100 % ... RF= xx, and go to... 2. 1,000-4,999 feet: a. 0-19 % ... RF= w, and go to... b. 20-39 % ... RF= w, and go to... c. 40-59 % ... RF= w, and go to... d. 60-79 % ... RF= w, and go to... e. 80-100 % ... RF= w, and go to... 3. 5,000-9,999 feet: a. 0-19 % ... RF= qq, and go to... b. 20-39 % ... RF= qq, and go to... c. 40-59 % ... RF= qq, and go to... d. 60-79 % ... RF= qq, and go to... e. 80-100 % ... RF= qq, and go to... 4. 10,000-14,999 feet: a. 0-19 % ... RF= ss, and go to... b. 20-39 % ... RF= ss, and go to... c. 40-59 % ... RF= ss, and go to... d. 60-79 % ... RF= ss, and go to... e. 80-100 % ... RF= ss, and go to... 5. 15,000-19,999 feet: a. 0-19 % ... RF= yy, and go to... b. 20-39 % ... RF= yy, and go to... c. 40-59 % ... RF= yy, and go to... d. 60-79 % ... RF= yy, and go to... e. 80-100 % ... RF= yy, and go to... 6. 20,000 feet or more: a. 0-19 % ... RF = zz, and go to... b. 20-39 % ... RF= zz, and go to... c. 40-59 % ... RF= zz, and go to... d. 60-79 % ... RF= zz, and go to... e. 80-100 % ... RF= zz, and go to...
production status of the reservoir? If...
30

1. currently producing oil, then go to... 2. depleted and abandoned, then go to... 3. none, this is a conceptual play, then go
to...
age of the reservoir? If... 1. Precambrian, then go to... 2. lower Paleozoic, then go to... 3. middle Paleozoic, then go to... 4. upper Paleozoic, then go to... 5. Triassic or Jurassic, then go to... 6. Cretaceous, then go to... 7. Cenozoic, then go to...
type of hydrocarbon expected? If... 1. mostly oil, then go to... 2. oil and associated gas, then go to... 3. non-associated gas, then go to... 4. biogenic gas, then go to... 5. unknown, then go to...
lithology of the reservoir? If... 1. mostly clastic rocks..if yes, then RF=0.8, and go to... 2. mostly carbonate rocks., if yes, then RF=.9, and go to... 3. a mixture of elastics & carbonates, RF=0.6, and go to... 4. algal bioherm, reef, stromatolitic.. RF=1.0, and go to... 5. not sedimentary rock...RF=0.25, and go to... 6. unknown...RF=1.0, and go to... 7. homogeneous well-sorted quartz sandstone... RF=1.0, and go to... 8. dirty sandstone with poor permeability... RF=0.3, and go to... 9. etc., etc., etc.
porosity of the reservoir? If... 1. 0-2 %...then RF=0.1, and go to... 2. 3-7 %...then RF=0.4, and go to... 3. 8-15 %...then RF=0.7, and go to... 4. 16-25 %...then RF=0.95, and go to... 5. unknown... then RF=0.5, and go to... 6. highly variable, ranging from tight to highly porous...then RF=0.6, and go to...
depth of the reservoir? If... 1. less than 1000 ft., then go to... 2. 1000 to 5000 ft., then go to... 3. 5000 to 10,000 ft., then go to... 4. 10,000 to 15,000 ft., then go to... 5. 15,000 to 20,000 ft., then go to... 6. over 20,000 ft., then go to...
31

past production history of the reservoir (barrels equivalent)? If... 1. none...then RF=0.5 [neither an attribute or a condemnation], and go to... 2. 100-999 BBLS...then RF=0.55, and go to... 3. 1,000-4,999 BBLS...then RF=0.60, and go to... 4. 5,000-9,999 BBLS...then RF=0.65, and go to... 5. 10,000-99,999 BBLS..then RF=0.7, and go to... 6. 100,000-999,999 BBLS...then RF=0.8, and go to... 7. 1,000,000-9,999,999 BBLS...then RF=.9, and go to... 8. 10,000,000-99,999,999 BBLS...then RF=.98, and go to... 9. 100,000,000-199,999,999 BBLS...then RF= .99, and go to... 10. 200,000,000-500,000,000 BBLS...then RF= 1.00, and go to...
thickness of the reservoir facies? If... 1. 1-9 feet...then RF=0.3, and go to... 2. 10-49 feet...then RF=0.4, and go to... 3. 50-99 feet...then RF=0.8, and go to... 4. 100-199 feet...then RF=0.85, and go to... 5. 200-499 feet...RF=0.90, and go to... 6. 500-999 feet...RF=0.95, and go to... 7. 1,000 feet or greater...RF=1.00, and go to... 8. unknown...then RF=0.50, and go to...
B. Write questions that ask other pertinent reservoir attribute questions, such as analogs, known hydrocarbon seeps and any existing evidence of hydrocarbons, depositional environment, etc....
J. Repeat this query process for every known or potential reservoir in this area of the province
M. Write rules that decide if this is an excellent, good, fair, poor, unconventional, or non-reservoir for each of the various forms of hydrocarbons
STEP 2: Write an expert system that evaluates and characterizes the potential source rocks of "zip code" XXXXXX. Relational databases CCC, EE, and KK will be queried and searched.
A. Write questions that ask... for source rock LMNFM, what is the
probability that this source rock exists in this area?
32

If...

1. 0.00, then go to...
2. 0.01-0.24, then go to, 3. 0.25-0.49, then go to, 4. 0.50-0.74, then go to, 5. 0.75-0.94, then go to,
6. 0.95-1.00, then go to,

thermal maturity? If... 1. less than 0.60 Ro% ...then RF=0.2, and go to... 2. 0.60-1.30 Ro ...then RF=1.0, and go to.., 3. 1.31-2.90 Ro %...then RF=0.3, and go to.., 4. 3.00-5.00 Ro ...then RF=0.05, and go to., 5. >5.00 Ro% ...then RF=0.0, and go to... 6. unknown ...then RF=0.5, and go to...

type of organic matter (Tissot and Welte, 1984)? 1. I (amorphous), then go to... 2. II (herbaceous), then go to... 3. Ill (woody), then go to... 4. unknown, then go to... 5. mixed types, then go to...

If.,

total organic carbon in clastic sedimentary rocks? If...
1. 0.00-0.50 2,...then RF=0.05, and go to... 2. 0.51-1.00 % .RF=0.20, and go to... 3. 1.01-2.00 % .RF=0.35, and go to... 4. 2.01-3.00 % .RF=0.65, and go to... 5. 3.01-4.00 X .RF=0.85, and go to... 6. 4.01-8.00 % ...RF=0.95, and go to... 7. 8.01 % or greater ...RF=1.0, and go to... 8. unknown .......RF=0.50, and go to...

B. Write questions asking about pertinent source rock characteristics, such as age and depth of burial...

C., D., E. Write questions...

F. Repeat this query process for every known or potential source rock in this part of the province

STEP 3: Write an expert system that evaluates the quality of stratigraphic and/or structural traps.

STEP 4:

Write an expert system that evaluates and characterizes the basin history sedimentological, thermal, subsidence/uplift, structural complexity, etc., etc. Databases P, Q, R, S, and T will be searched and rules 842 through 2,155 will be fired.

33

A. Write questions that ask about basin classification...(Kingston and others, 1983a,b; Klemme, 1986).
B. Write questions that ask about geophysical data, such as gravity and magnetic...
C. Write questions that ask...

STEP 43:

Write an expert system which includes rules that integrate relationships between empirical associations of geology and hydrocarbon accumulations; the goal is to integrate all of the expert systems (reservoir rocks, source rocks, traps, migration, etc.) and make sense from the relevancy factors (or judgmental beliefs, fuzzy logic, weight factors, or confidence levels).

STEP 44: have the system write the rationale for areas that have high probability distributions.
N.B. this expert system may have 3,000 or more questions that must be asked of the various databases, and it may have more than 1,000 rules that link and address the significance of the answers to these questions. Also, note that there are many ways to structure the questions and rules. For example, one could use a strategy where...
IF xxxxx = YES, AND, wwwww = YES, AND,
yyyyy = YES, AND,
zzzzz = NO,...
THEN Scuddzy Formation = VERY POOR RESERVOIR, or... THEN geologic "zip code 'FFFFF'" = a potential oil play larger
than one million barrels.
Another example might be...
IF reservoir XYZFM is present, AND, age is Cretaceous, AND, type of hydrocarbon expected is mostly oil, AND, evidence of hydrocarbons is oil shows in several boreholes, AND, lithology is algal bioherm/mound, AND, porosity is 10-15 percent, AND, average thickness is 50-99 feet, AND, depth is 10,000-15,000 feet, AND, areal extent is 1,000 square miles, THEN, conclude that this potential reservoir will meet the
criteria for a good reservoir in a hydrocarbon play
On any given scientific subject there is usually some disagreement among the experts on how to interpret the data. Thus, a wellwritten set of rules should enhance the quality of the expert system by allowing for such differences of opinion, i.e., it should provide alternative conclusions.

34

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The computer has revolutionized society more than any other invention since the Industrial Revolution; it enables us to integrate knowledge at very high speed. The significance of the development of expert systems has not been trivial. The use of neural networks and expert systems to make human decisions (and study the human brain) is the result of a natural and probably an inevitable evolution in science. Such systems today are a major asset to the business and scientific communities of industrialized countries of the world.
The 1980s was a time during which there was an explosion in the accumulation of digitzed/machineable data and consequently, a need to manage and interpret it. Today, this deluge of information is overwhelming the scientific community geologists included. In scientific circles the syndrome is known as "information anxiety" or "paralysis from analysis". Over 50,000 journals publish over a million scientific articles annually worldwide. Thus, one can easily support the argument that the time has come when resource assessors need to be able to efficiently search out the petroleum assessment information and integrate the universal data system using the existing expertise and computer knowledge/programs of the computer industry and Geological Survey scientists. The goal is toward applications that the petroleum industry and academia have already been developing, refining, and using successfully to find petroleum.
Although the success ratio of drilling (new fields per new wildcat boreholes) is at an all time high in the United States, the amount of petroleum resources discovered in these fields is near or at an all time low (Menard, 1981). Menard and Sharman (1975) and Menard (1981) further concluded that purely random exploratory drilling using computer simulation was actually far more successful than the actual search for petroleum by non-random drilling. Given this fact, one can judge the incredible uncertainty about the methodology used in estimating undiscovered resources, particularly when exploration based on modern scientific knowledge apparently may have little or no positive impact on finding new oil and gas reserves.
By adopting the use of expert systems, resource assessors can accomplish the following job functions: capture knowledge from experts and pass it along to those who will eventually research the same problems, demand compatibility among geologists, organize spatial databases and the decision-making process, assess risk, and confidently determine the potential of hydrocarbon accumulation. Adoption is not a question of "if" it will happen, but rather "when" it will happen.
Knowledge-based computing employing artificial intelligence is no longer considered "science fiction". Through user interface programs, such as INGRES, the end user (assessor) of an expert system provides facts about a geologic problem to the system's inference engine, which in turn taps the appropriate knowledge bases and then returns a solution. Petroleum exploration, and hence petroleum resource appraisal,
35

has been recognized by the experts as an "expert systems task". In this report I have shown that sophisticated generic computer software is commercially available to accomodate the individual geologist's rules. Programs and rules for expert systems have successfully been developed in the U.S. Geological Survey (Miller, 1986a) and in academia (Bezdek and others, 1990; Cheong, 1990; and, Morgan and others, 1988) to assess the hydrocarbon potential on the scale from hydrocarbon plays to major world petroleum provinces. However, greater emphasis on the use of these computing approaches is crucial to developing a long-term strategy for recurrent national petroleum assessments.
The components of artificial intelligence, expert systems, neural networks, and CIS (Geographic Information Systems) are successful, practical, labor-saving, "real world" tools waiting for new applications (Miller, 1986a and 1989). Much of the expert systems development to date in the U.S. Geological Survey effort to appraise oil and gas resources has been in the area of CIS rather than in defining new petroleum plays.
Today's expert system software can reason, answer questions, "learn" (or be trained, i.e., neural nets) from past experience (iterative parallel processing of data), and even handle contradictions. Software that can do this is certainly equivalent to a very smart "technological assistant". The GIS can manipulate and produce geologic maps that represent numerical and logical databases. The threshold for entry into this exciting computer environment continues to drop as more, and friendlier, expert systems become available; as responsible (and under-staffed) scientists of the U.S. Geological Survey, we need to take advantage of the powerful applications afforded by expert systems.
Expert systems that predict petroleum source-rock potential have been available to the public for several years (Fowler, 1987). If a resource assessor could merge source-rock systems with reservoir-rock systems and basin-history systems, the end result would be an extremely valuable addition to our appraisal toolbox. It is suggested here that the petroleum system of Magoon (1987, 1988a,b, and 1992) can provide the basic architectural structure for writing empirical association rules of the qualitative part of the assessment expert systems. The level of certainty (subjective belief factors) have been built into the petroleum system. The last phase, i.e., the quantitative part, of the assessment has already been developed (and made available as microcomputer disks to the public) by Crovelli (1983, 1984, 1986, 1987, and 1988) and Crovelli and Balay (1984, 1986, 1988, 1990, and 1992).
An easier exchange of technical data and information is needed among Survey researchers who have their own "private" databases. There can be more "team effort" in resource assessment. This effort must incorporate the "smart", cost-effective, automated, knowledgebased environments of the 1990s with the hundreds of scattered databases and files within the Geological Survey.
36

A small, simple, prototype expert system can be developed for a small petroliferous geologic province (maybe a training area for neural networks), using: 1) a new array of searchable databases, 2) NEXPERT OBJECT software (which can talk to many different databases simultaneously), and 3) valid rules. Ultimately, this prototype can be expanded so that our resource assessors and the U.S. Geological Survey will benefit by being able to rapidly generate clear, meaningful, high-quality, and insightful assessment products. These critical products could be three-dimensional models, documents, and maps for an industry which must find the oil and gas essential to our national interests.
Scientists of the U.S. Geological Survey must keep up with the rapidly-evolving computer technology that is used to scan, capture, edit, vectorize/rasterize, analyze, plot, and display spatially-referenced layered data, i.e., combinations of geographic, cultural, and scientific data. By using structured knowledge and the commerciallyavailable expert system shells, such as NEXPERT OBJECT, the resource assessor can work faster with less project money and with improved quality, compatibility, and consistency over the long term. Expert systems will not replace people; they will, however, relieve people from repetitive tasks, reduce the tedium of always starting over, and capture expert sources of knowledge making it available to a wider range of users.
Expert systems are easy to de-bug and update. Rules can be changed easily; adding, editing, and deleting information is simple because no complex computer language is needed by the user. Geologists can concentrate on the geology and not be overwhelmed by all the computer "mumbo-jumbo". Most importantly, each hydrocarbon play will be fully documented in terms of the assumptions, weight factors, and reasons for the final assessment (see Fritz, 1985).
A petroleum appraisal test project, limited to economically-recoverable conventional hydrocarbons, could be initiated by a small team of multidisciplinary scientists for a small geographic area, e.g., northern Arizona's Colorado Plateau (or a portion thereof), to incorporate the geologic data and advanced technology (software and hardware) available today. A successful application will undoubtedly prove to be an invaluable tool and opportunity to help policy-makers better understand the Nation's long-term energy situation and to help them make better-informed decisions.
SELECTED AND CITED REFERENCES
Ackley, D.H., Hinton, G.E., and Sejnowski, T.J., 1985, A learning algorithm for Boltzmann machines: Cognitive Science, v. 9, p. 147-169.
Adams, J.B., 1976, A probability model of medical reasoning and the MYCIN model: Mathematical Biosciences, v. 32, p. 177-186.
Adelman, M.A., 1980, World supply and demand, in Miall, A.D., ed.,
37

Facts and principles of world petroleum occurrence: Calgary, Canada, Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 6, p. 377-389.
Agterberg, P.P., 1989, Systematic approach to dealing with uncertainty of geoscience information in mineral exploration, in Weiss, A., ed., Proceedings of the 21st Symposium on Applications of Computers and Operations Research in the Mineral Industry: Littleton, CO., Society of Mining Engineers, Inc., p. 165-178.
AI Applications, 1989, Integrating CIS and expert system technology at USGS, in Stock, M., and Robinson, V.B., eds., AI Applications in Natural Resource Management, CIS Special Issue, v. 3, n. 4, p. 4445.
Akins, J.E., 1986, Why OPEC production accord is so critical to world industry: Oil and Gas Journal, June 2nd, p. 30-31.
Aleksander, I., and Burnett, P., 1987, Thinking machines - The search for artificial intelligence: New York, NY., Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 208 p.
Alien, P.A., and Alien, J.R.,1990, Basin analysis: Principles and applications: Boston, MA., Blackwell Scientific Publications, Inc., 451 p.
Allenby, R.J., and Schnetzler, C.C., 1983, United States crustal thickness: Tectonophysics, v. 93, p. 13-31.
Alty, J.L., 1985, Use of expert systems: Computer-Aided Engineering Journal, v. 2, n. 1, p. 2-9.
Alty, J.L., and Coombs, M.J., 1984, The handling of uncertain evidence MYCIN and PROSPECTOR, expert systems, concepts and examples: Manchester, England, NCC Publications.
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1974, Energy: Science, v. 184, n. 4,134, April 19th, 1974, 402 p.
American Gas Association, 1976, Gas supply review, v. 4, n. 7, April: Chicago, IL., Institute of Gas Technology, p. 53-58.
American Geophysical Union, 1989, Sedimentation and tectonics of Western North America: Washington, B.C., American Geophysical Union, Vol. 3, for the 28th International Geological Congress, Field Trip Guidebook T138, Extensional tectonics in the Basin and Range Province between the southern Sierra Nevada and the Colorado Plateau; and, Field Trip Guidebook T116/389, Overflight of the tectonic boundary between the Colorado Plateau and the Basin Range Province.
American Petroleum Institute, 1976, Standard definitions for petroleum statistics, 2nd Edition: Washington, D.C., American Petroleum Institute Technical Report no. 1, 40 p..
38

American Petroleum Institute, American Gas Association, and Canadian Petroleum Association, 1967-1980, Reserves of crude oil, natural gas liquids, and natural gas in the United States and Canada: New York, NY., American Petroleum Institute.
Anderson, J.A., and Rosenfeld, E., editors, 1988, Neurocomputing: Foundations of Research: A reader: Cambridge, MA., MIT Press, 729 p.
Anderson, R.Y., and Harshbarger, J.V., editors, 1958, Guidebook of the Black Mesa basin northeastern Arizona: New Mexico Geological Society, 9th Field Conference, 205 p.
Andreev, P.P., Bogomolov, A.I., Dobryanskii, A.F., and Kartsev, A.A., 1968, Transformation of petroleum in nature, international series of monographs in Earth sciences, volume 29: New York, NY., Pergamon Press, Inc., 466 p.
Andriole, S.J., 1985, Applications in artificial intelligence: Princeton, NJ., Petrocelli Books, Inc., 528 p.
Angus, J., 1989, Expert systems take off: Infoworld, April 24th, 1989, p. 43-47.
Anschutz, P.P., 1980, The overthrust belt: Will it double U.S. gas reserves: World Oil, v. 190, n. 1, p. 111-116.
Antennucci, J.C., Brown, K., Croswell, P.L., and Kevany, M.J., 1991, Geographic Information Systems A guide to the technology: New York, NY., Van Nostrand Reinhold, 301 p.
Antony, R., and Emmerman, P.J., 1986, Spatial reasoning and knowledge representation, in Opitz, B., ed., Geographic Information Systems in government: Hampton, VA., A. Deepak Publishing Company, p. 795814.
Apte, C.V., 1982, Expert knowledge management for multi-level modeling with an application to well-log analysis: New Brunswick, NJ., Rutgers University, Laboratory for Computer Science Research, Report LCSR-TR-41, December.
Apte, C.V., and Weiss, S.M., 1984, A knowledge representation framework for expert control of interactive software systems: New Brunswick, NJ., Rutgers University, Laboratory for Computer Science Research, Report CBM-TR-143, October.
Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, 1986?, Summary of yearly production of oil, gas, and helium, 1954-1985, 11 p.
Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, 1987, State of Arizona well location map four, 37 p., scale approximately 1:700,000.
Arnold, E.G., and Hill, J.M., compilers, 1981, New Mexico's energy resources '81: New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources
39

Circular 181, 59 p.
Aronoff, S., 1989, Geographic Information Systems: A management perspective: Ottawa, Canada, WDL Publications, 294 p.
Arps, J.J., Mortada, M., and Smith, A.E., 1970, Relationship between proved reserves and exploratory effort: Society of Petroleum Engineers Paper 2995.
Attanasi, E.D., and Drew, L.J., 1985, Lognormal field size distribution as a consequence of economic truncation: Mathematical Geology, v. 17, n. 4, p. 335-351.
Austin, H., 1984, Market trends in artificial intelligence, in Reitman, W., ed., Artificial intelligence applications for business: Norwood, NJ., Ablex.
Ayres, E., 1956, The fuel situation: Scientific American, v. 195, n. 4, p. 43-49.
Baars, D.L., 1962, Permian System of Colorado Plateau: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 46, p. 149-218.
Baars, D.L., editor, 1969, Geology and natural history of the Grand Canyon region: Four Corners Geological Society, 5th Field Conference guidebook, 212 p.
Baars, D.L., editor, 1979, Permianland: Four Corners Geological Society, 9th Field Conference guidebook, 186 p.
Baars, D.L., 1983, The Colorado Plateau: A geologic history: Albuquerque, NM., University of New Mexico Press, 279 p.
Bahr, C.W., 1963, Virgin Oil Field, Washington County, Utah, in Heylmun, E.B., ed., Guidebook to the geology of southwestern Utah: Intermountain Association of Petroleum Geologists, 12th Field Conference, p. 169-171.
Bailey, D.L., and Thompson, D.M., 1990, Developing neural-network applications: AI Expert, v. 5, n. 9, p. 34-41.
Baker, R.A., Gehman, H.M., James, W.R., and White, D.A., 1984, Geologic field number and size assessments of oil and gas plays: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 68, p. 426-437.
Balachandran, S., 1980, Energy statistics A guide to information sources: Detroit, MI., Gale Research Company, 272 p.
Ball Associates, LTD., 1965, Surface and shallow oil-impregnated rocks and shallow oil fields in the United States: U.S. Bureau of Mines Monograph 12, p. 41-47.
Ball, M.W., Baker, A.A., Cohee, G.V., Whitney, P.B., and Ball, D., editors, 1951, Possible future petroleum provinces of North
40

America: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Symposium, April 24-27, 1950, Chicago, IL., 358 p.
Ballou, M., 1990, Expert system includes unified bridge to multiple databases: Digital Review, June 25th, 1990, p. 3.
Bally, A.W., 1975, A geodynamic scenario for hydrocarbon occurrence: Proceedings of 9th World Petroleum Congress, Tokyo, volume 2, p. 33-34.
Bally, A.W., 1987, Phanerozoic basin evolution in North America: Episodes, v. 10, n. 4, p. 248-253.
Bally, A.W., and Palmer, A.R., editors, 1989, The geology of North America An overview: Geological Society of America volume A, 619 p., plus microfilm and maps.
Bally, A.W., and Snelson, S., 1980, Facts and principles of world petroleum occurrence: Realms of subsidence: Canadian Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir, v. 6, p. 1-94.
Banares-Alcantara, R., Westerberg, A.W., and Rychener, M.D., 1985, Development of an expert system for physical property predictions: Computing and Chemical Engineering, v. 9, n. 2, p. 127-142.
Barath, E., and Futo, I., 1984, A regional planning system based on artificial intelligence concepts: Regional Science Association, Papers and Proceedings v. 55, p. 135-154.
Barker, C., 1979, Organic geochemistry in petroleum exploration: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Continuing Education Course Notes, Series 110, 159 p.
Barker, C., Crane, M., and Pawlevicz, M., 1988, Remote sensing, GIS technology, and petroleum microseepage: U.S. Geological Survey, The Cross Section, December, p. 7. [Note: this reference is not citable in a published article.
Barouch, E., and Kaufman, G., 1976, Probabilities modeling of oil and gas discovery, i.n Roberts, F.S., ed., Energy: Mathematics and models: Philadelphia, PA., Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, p. 133-150.
Barouch, E., and Kaufman, G.M., 1977, Estimation of undiscovered oil and gas, in Proceedings of the Symposia in applied mathematics, vol. 21, Providence, RI.: American Mathematical Society, p. 7791.
Barr, A., Cohen, P.R., and Feigenbaum, E.A., editors, 1979, 1981, 1984, and 1989, The handbook of artificial intelligence, volumes I, II, III, and IV, respectively: Los Altos, CA., William Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., p. 408, 640, 428, and 401, respectively.
41

Barren, E.J., 1985, Numerical modeling, a frontier in petroleum source rock prediction: Results based on Cretaceous simulations: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 69, p. 448459.
Barss, D.L., 1978, The significance of petroleum resource estimates and their relation to exploration: Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology, v. 26, n. 2, p. 275-291.
Barton, C.C., 1992, Fractal nature of hydrocarbon accumulations and price Implications for resource assessment, exploration and development strategies, and economic forecasting (abst.), in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources, 1992: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1074, McKelvery Forum, p. 3.
Barwin, J.R., 1969, Oil and gas possibilities in Arizona: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 67, n. 35, p. 186-188.
Barwin, J.R., King, R.W., and Hassenfratz, C.A., 1971, Future oil and gas potential of northeast Arizona, in Cram, I.H., ed., Future petroleum provinces of the United States - Their geology and potenial: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 15, p. 449-469.
Barzilay, A., 1984, An expert system for tutoring probability theory: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
Bayley, R.W., and Muehlberger, W.R., 1968, Basement rock map of the United States: U.S. Geological Survey, scale 1:2,500,000.
Beaumont, C., editor, 1987, Sedimentary basins and basin-forming mechanisms: Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 12, Atlantic Geoscience Society Special Publication 5, 527 p.
Beck, R.J., 1991, Politics shaping U.S. oil, gas outlook in 1991: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 89, n. 4, Jan. 28th, p. 49-60.
Beikman, H.M., Peterson, J.A., Huber, D.F., and Butler, W.C., 1986, Metallic mineral and mineral-fuel resource potential map of Arizona showing major mineral deposits: U.S. Geological Survey Map MR-94, scale 1:1,000,000.
Berg, R.R., Calhoun, J.C., and Whiting, R.L., 1974, Prognosis for expanded U.S. production of crude oil: Science, v. 184, n. 4,134 April 19th, 1974, p. 331-336.
Beus, S.S., Rawson, R.R., editors, 1979, Carboniferous stratigraphy in the Grand Canyon country, northern Arizona and southern Nevada: American Geological Institute guidebook series no. 2, field trip no. 13, 9th International Congress of Stratigraphy and Geology, 138 p.
Bhattacharyya, G.K., and Johnson, R.A., 1977, Statistical concepts and methods: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, 639 p.
42

Bieberman, R.A., and Weber, R.H., compilers, 1974, New Mexico energy resource map 2: New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, scale approximately 1:1,000,000.
Bird, K.J., 1984, A comparison of the play-analysis technique as applied in hydrocarbon resources assessments of the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska and of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-78, 18 p.
Bird, K.J., 1986, A comparison of the play analysis technique as applied in hydrocarbon resource assessments of the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, in Rice, D.D., ed., Oil and gas assessment Methods and applications: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Studies in Geology 21, p. 133-142.
Bissell, H.J., 1969, Permian and Lower Triassic transition from shelf to basin (Grand Canyon, Arizona, to Spring Mountain, Nevada), in Baars, D.L., ed., Geology and natural history of the Grand Canyon region: Four Corners Geological Society, 5th Field Conference, p. 135-170.
Blakey, R.C., 1979, Oil impregnated carbonate rocks of the Timpoweap Member, Moenkopi Formation, Hurricane Cliffs area, Utah and Arizona: Utah Geology, v. 6, p. 45-53.
Blank, H.R., and Kucks, R.P., 1989, Preliminary aeromagnetic, gravity, and generalized geologic maps of the USGS Basin and Range-Colorado Plateau transition zone study area in southwestern Utah, southeastern Nevada, and northwestern Arizona (the BARCO Project): U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 89-0432, 16 p., 3 sheets, scale 1:250,000.
Bloomfield, P., Deffeys, K.S., Watson, G.S., Benjamini, Y., and Stine, R.A., 1979, Volume and area of oil fields and their impact on order of discovery: Princeton University, Department of Statistics Technical Report, 53 p.
Bohi, D.R., 1981, Analyzing demand behavior: A study of energy elasticities: Washington, D.C., Resources for the Future, Inc., 192 p.
Bohi, D.R., and Montgomery, W.D., 1982, Oil prices, energy security, and import policy: Washington, D.C., Resources for the Future, Inc., 220 p.
Bohi, D.R., and Toman, M.A., 1984, Analyzing nonrenewable resource supply: Washington, D.C., Resources for the Future, Inc., 180 p.
Bois, C., 1975, Petroleum zone concept and the similarity analysis Contributions to resource appraisal, in Studies in geology no. 1 Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, p. 87-89.
Bois, C., Bouche, P., and Pelet, R., 1982, Global geologic history and
43

distribution of hydrocarbon reserves: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 66, p. 1248-1270.
Bonham-Carter, G.F., 1992, Applying CIS to geology: Geotimes, v. 37, n. 8, August, p. 6-7.
Bonnet, A., and Dahan, C., 1983, Oil-well data interpretation using expert system and pattern recognition technique: Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence - 83, p. 185-189.
Botbol, J.M., 1971, An application of characteristic analysis to mineral exploration, in Decision making in the mineral industry: Canadian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Special Volume 12, p. 92-99.
Bradshaw, G.F., Langley, P.W., and Simon, H.A., 1983, Studying scientific discovery by computer simulations: Science, v. 222, n. 4627, p. 971-975.
Braunstein, J., editor, 1976, North American oil and gas fields: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 24, 360 p.
Bridges, N.J., Hanley, J.T., and McCammon, R.B., 1985, PREPRO: A computer program for encoding regional exploration data for use in characteristic analysis: Computers and Geosciences, v. 11, n. 5, p. 513-519.
Brody, A., 1989, 1st CLASS FUSION is easy, powerful: Info World Reprint, Product Comparison, v. 11, n. 25, June 19th, 4 p.
Brooks, J., and Welte, D., editors, 1987, Advances in petroleum geochemistry, volume 2: New York, NY., Academic Press, 262 p.
Brown, S.C., 1956, Petroleum and natural gas potentialities, in Kiersch, G.A., contract director, Mineral resources, Navajo-Hopi Indian Reservations, Arizona-Utah, volume 1: Tucson, AZ., University of Arizona, prepared for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, p. 64-72.
Brown, S.C., and Lauth, R.E., 1958, Oil and gas potentialities of northern Arizona, in Anderson, R.Y., and Harshbarger, J.W., eds., Guidebook of the Black Mesa basin, northern Arizona: New Mexico Geological Society, 9th Field Conference, p. 153-160.
Brown, S.C., and Lauth, R.E., 1961, Northeastern Arizona Its oil, gas, and helium prospects, in Oil, gas and helium in Arizona Its occurrence and potential: Arizona Development Board for the Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, p. 7-21.
Buchanan, B.C., 1982, New research on expert systems, in J.E. Hayes, D. Michie, and Y-H Pao, editors, Machine Intelligence: Chichester, England, Ellis Horwood Limited, p. 269-199.
Buchanan, B.C., 1985, Expert systems: Journal of Automated Reasoning, v. 1, n. 1, p. 28-35.
44

Buchanan, B.C., 1986, Expert systems: Working systems and the research literature: Expert sytems, v. 3, n. 1, p. 32-51.
Buchanan, B.C., and Duda, R.O., 1982, Principles of rule-based expert systems: Stanford University, Department of Computer Science, Heuristic programming project report no. HPP-82-14, August.
Buchanan, B.C. and Shortliffe, E.H., 1984, Rule-based expert systems: The MYCIN Experiments of the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishers.
Bundy, A., editor, 1986, Catalogue of artificial intelligence tools, 2nd Edition: New York, NY., Springer-Verlag Publishers, 168 p.
Bundy, A., Silver, B., and Plummer, D., 1985, An analytical comparison of some rule-learning programs: Artificial Intelligence, v. 27, n. 2, p. 137-181.
Bureau of Natural Gas, 1972, National gas supply and demand 1971-1990: Washington, D.C., U.S. Federal Power Commission, Staff Report, no. 2, 166 p.
Burgan, S.J., 1984, Index of samples of wells drilled in Arizona: AriOil and Gas Conservation Commission, 20 p.
Burke, R.J., and Gardner, F.J., 1969, The world's monster oil fields, and how they rank: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 67, n. 2, p. 43-49.
Burrough, P., 1986, Principles of Geographic Information Systems for land resources assessment: Oxford, England, Oxford University Press, 193 p.
Burt, D.M., and Pewe, T.L., editors, 1978, Guidebook to the geology of central Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology Special Paper #2.
Butler, W.C., 1987, A quantitative oil and gas play analysis and hydrocarbon potential study of the Ute Mountain Ute Indian Reservation, southwestern Colorado and northwestern New Mexico: U.S. Geological Survey Administrative Report BIA-17 II E, 184 p.
Butler, W.C., 1988, The rationale for assessment of undiscovered, economically recoverable oil and gas in central and northern Arizona: Play analyses of seven favorable areas: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 87-450-V, 145 p.
Butler, W.C., 1991, Elevation data for the Precambrian surface in the central and southern Colorado Plateau and vicinity: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 92-194, 69 p.
Calkins, H.W., 1983, A pragmatic approach to Geographic Information Systems design, in Peuquet, D., and O'Callaghan, J., editors, The design and implementation of computer-based Geographic Infor-
45

mation Systems: Amherst, NY., International Geographical Union, Commission on Geographical Data Sensing and Processing.
Calkins, J.A., Crosby, A.S., Huffman, T.E., Clark, A.L., Mason, G.T., Jr., and Bascle, R.J., 1980, Interactive computer methods for generating mineral-resource maps: U.S. Geological Survey Circular . 815, 70 p.
Campbell, A.N., Hollister, V.F., Duda, R.O., and Hart, P.E., 1982, Recognition of a hidden mineral deposit by an artificial intelligence program: Science, v. 217, n. 4563, Sept. 3, p. 927-929.
Canada Department of Energy, Mines, and Resources, 1977, Oil and natural gas resources of Canada, 1976: Ottawa, Canada, CDEMR Report EP77-1, 76 p.
Capen, E.G., 1976, The difficulty of assessing uncertainty: Journal of Petroleum Technology, v. 28, p. 843-850.
Carlson, C.K., 1990, The Eighth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-90): U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Division, Developments, v. 7, n. 10, p. 259-261.
Carlson, C.K., 1991, The IEEE/ACM International Conference on developing and managing expert systems programs: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Division, Developments, v. 8, n. 12, p. 327-329.
Carlson, J.E., and Vilden, R., 1968, Transcontinental geophysical survey (35-39) geologic map from 100 to 112 . longitude: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Geologic Investigations Map 1-533C, scale 1:1,000,000.
Carpenter, G.A., and Grossberg, S., 1987, A massively parallel architecture for a self-organizing neural pattern recognition machine: Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, v. 37, p. 54-116.
Carter, J.R., 1984, Computer mapping: Progress in the '80s: Washington, D.C., Association of American Geographers, Resource Publications in Geography, 86 p.
Carter, L.M.H., editor, 1988, USGS research on energy resources - 1988: Program and abstracts: United States Geological Survey Circular 1025, 70 p.
Carter, L.M.H., editor, 1992, USGS research on energy resources 1992: Program and abstracts: United States Geological Survey Circular 1074, 89 p.
Cartwright, J., and Leonard, J., 1990, Petroleum exploration applications in GIS, in Stutheit, J., ed., The 1990 GIS Sourcebook Geographic Information System Technology in 1990, 2nd Ed.: Fort Collins, CO., GIS World, Inc., p. 233-235.
Casper, J.C., 1957, Drillers can look to a bright future: Oil and Gas
46

Journal, October 21st, p. 68-70.
Caudill, M., 1987, Nueral network primer, part I: AI Expert, December, p. 46-52.
Caudill, M., 1988, Neural network primer, part III: AI Expert, June, p. 53-59.
Caudill, M., 1990, Useful, inexpensive, and powerful MAHOGANY PROFESSIONAL: Software review: AI Expert, v. 5, n. 7, p. 61-63.
Caudill, M., 1992, In our own image - Building an artificial person: New York, NY., Oxford University Press, 230 p.
Century, J.R., 1977, Western Canadian oil and gas supplies: A realistic view, in Proceedings, Annual Conference, Toronto, Canada: Ontario Petroleum Institute, v. 16, technical paper #6, 11 p.
Century, J.R., 1980, Conventional petroleum assessments: Facts and fallacies, in Miall, A.D., ed., Facts and principles of world petroleum occurrence: Calgary, Canada, Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 6, p. 283-300.
Chamberlin, T.C., 1931, The method of multiple working hypotheses: Journal of Geology, v. 39, p. 155-165.
Chapman, R.E., 1983, Petroleum geology: New York, New York, Elsevier Science Publishers, Developments in Petroleum Science, 16, 415 p.
Chapman, R.E., 1987, Fluid flow in sedimentary basins: A geologist's perspective, in Goff, J.C., and Williams, B.P.J., eds., Fluid flow in sedimentary basins and aquifers: Boston, MA., Blackwell Scientific Publications, for The Geological Society, Special Publication no. 34, p.3-18.
Charland, W., 1988, Expert systems breed 'knowledge engineers': Denver Post, Denver, CO., Dec. 11, 1988, business section.
Charniak, E., and McDermott, D., 1985 (reprinted 1986), Introduction to artificial intelligence: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 701 p.
Charpentier, R.R., and Wesley, J.S., 1986, Annotated bibliography of methodology for assessment of undiscovered oil and gas resources, in Rice, D.D., ed., Oil and gas assessment Methods and applications: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology #21, p. 247-263.
Cheeney, R.F., 1983, Statistical methods in geology: Boston, MA., George Alien and Unwin Publishers, Ltd., 169 p.
Cheeseman, P.C., 1983, A method of computing generalized Bayesian probability values for expert systems, in Proceedings of the 8th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
47

Karlsruhe, West Germany, Aug. 8-12, 1983, p. 198-202.
Cheeseman, P.C., 1984, Learning of expert system data, in Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Principles of Knowledge Based Systems, Denver, CO., Dec. 3-4, 1984: Nev York, NY., Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Press, p. 115-122.
Cheney, E.S., 1974, U.S. energy resources: Limits and future outlook: American Scientist, v. 62, Jan.-Feb., 1974, p. 14-22.
Cheong, D., 1990, PLAYMAKER, a knowledge-based expert system to characterize hydrocarbon fields, and its application to the three basins The U.S. Gulf Coast, the Great Valley, California, and the Gyeongsang Basin of Korea: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geological Sciences, University of South Carolina, 246 p.
Chevron Corporation, 1986, Overview energy outlook to the year 2000: San Francisco, CA., Chevron Corporation, 16 p.
Chidsey, T.C., Allison, M.L., and Palacas, J.G., 1990, Potential for Precambrian source rock in Utah [and northern Arizona] (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 74, n. 8, p. 1319.
Chilingar, G.V., Mannon, R.W., and Rieke, H.H., III, editors, 1972, Oil and gas production from carbonate rocks: New York, NY., American Elsevier Publishing Company, Inc., 408 p.
Chiou, W.C., 1985, NASA image-based geological expert system development project for hyperspectral image analysis: Applied Optics, v. 24, n. 14, p. 2085-2091.
Christiansen, R.L., and Lipman, P.W., 1972, Cenozoic volcanism and platetectonic evolution of the Western United States, II: Late Cenozoic: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series A., v. 271, n. 1,213, p. 249-284.
Chung, C.F., 1978, Computer program for the logistic model to estimate the probability of occurrence of discrete events: Geological Survey of Canada Paper 78-11, 23 p.
Chung, C.F., and Agterberg, P.P., 1980, Regression models for estimating mineral resources from geological map data: Journal of Mathematical Geology, v. 12, n. 5, p. 473.
Chung, C.F., Fabbri, A.G., and Sindling-Larsen, R., editors, 1988, Quantitative analysis of mineral and energy resources: Dordrecht, Holland, D. Reidel Publishing Company, 738 p.
Churchland, P.M., and Churchland, P.S., 1990, Could a machine think?: Scientific American, v. 262, n. 1, p. 32-37.
Churchland, P.S., and Sejnowski, T.J., 1992, The computational brain: Cambridge, MA., MIT Press.
48

Clancey, W.J., 1983, The epistemology of a rule-based expert system A framework for explanation: Artificial Intelligence (an international journal sponsored by The British Computer Society), v. 20, p. 215-251.
Clark, I., 1982 (reprinted edition), Practical geostatistics: London, England, Applied Science Publishers, Ltd., 129 p.
Clem, K.M., and Brown, K.W., 1984, Petroleum resources of the Paradox basin, Utah: Utah Geological and Mineralogical Survey Bulletin, #119, 162 p.
Cluff, R.M., and Barrows, M.H., compilers, 1982, Hydrocarbon generation and source rock evaluation (origin of petroleum III): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Reprint Series no. 24, 215 p.
Cochran, W., 1986, Committee studies petroleum reserve: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Explorer, June, v. 7, n. 6, p. 30-31.
Cohen, P.R., and Feigenbaum, E.A., 1986, The handbook of artificial intelligence, vol. 3: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Comptroller General of the United States, 1977, What will be the role of fossil fuels in meeting future energy needs?, in Energy Digest: A bibliography: U.S. General Accounting Office, p. 17-22.
Computer Oriented Geological Society, 1991, June Front Range Section meeting: COGS-MAP A public domain raster-based CIS system: COGS Letter, July, p. 3, 10.
Condie, K.C., 1981 Precambrian rocks of the southwestern United States and adjacent areas of Mexico: New Mexico Bureau of Geology and Mineral Resources, Resource Map #13, scale 1:1,500,000.
Conley, J.N., 1974, Review of the development of oil and gas resources of northern Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, Special Publication No. 1, 10 p.
Conley, J.N., 1975, Well location map nine, Colorado Plateau Province, Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, County well location map nine with explanatory text and well-data tabulation, 45 p., scale 1:500,000.
Conley, J.N., Structure and correlation sections, eastern Mogollon Slope region east-central Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, GXS-1.
Conley, J.N., and Giardina, S., Jr., 1979, Favorable and potentially favorable areas for hydrocarbon and geothermal energy sources in northeastern Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, Report of Investigations #7, 56 p.
49

Conley, J.N., and Scurlock, J.R., 1976, Structure map eastern Mogollon Slope region Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission map G-6A, scale 1:500,000.
Conley, J.N., and Stacey, O.A., 1977 (rev. 1983), Well location map four, State of Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, 35 P-
Connan, J., 1974, Time-temperature relation in oil genesis: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 58, p. 2516-2521.
Conoco, Inc., 1985, World energy outlook through [the year] 2000: Wilmington, DE., Coordinating and Planning Department, Conoco, Inc., 11 p.
Conrad, M.A., and Beightol, D.S., 1988, Expert systems identify fossils and manage large paleontological databases: Geobyte, v. 3, n. 1, p.42-46.
Conybeare, C.E.B., 1963, Hydrocarbon-generation potential and hydrocarbon yield capacity of sedimentary basins: Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology, v. 13, p. 509-528.
Cook, T.D., and Bally, A.W., editors, 1975, Stratigraphic atlas of North and Central America: Princeton, NJ., Princeton University Press, 272 p.
Cooley, M.E., compiler, 1967, Arizona highway geologic map and geologic history: Arizona Geological Society, scale 1:1,000,000.
Cooley, M.E., 1977, Map of Arizona showing selected alluvial, structural, and geomorphic features: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 77-0343, 20 p., 1 sheet, scales approximately 1:3,168,000 and 1:1,000,000.
Cooley, M.E., Harshbarger, J.W., Akers, J.W., and Hardt, W.F., 1969, Regional hydrogeology of the Navajo and Hopi Indian Reservations, Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 521-A, 61 p.
Coombs, M.J., and Alty, J., 1984, Expert systems: An alternative paradigm: International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, v. 20, n. 1, January, p. 21-43.
Cordell, R.J., 1972, Depths of oil origin and primary migration: A review and critique: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 56, p. 2029-2067.
Coughlan, J.C., and Running, S.W., 1989, An expert system to aggregate biophysical attributes of a forested landscape within a Geographic Information System: AI Applications, v. 3, n. 4, p. 35-43.
Coulson, R.N., Folse, L.J., and Loh, O.K., 1987, Artificial intelligence
50

and natural resource management: Science, v. 237, July 17th, p. 262-267.
Courteille, J.M., Fabre, M., and Hollander, C.R., 1983, An advanced solution: The drilling advisor SECOFOR, in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, San Francisco, CA.: Society of Petroleum Engineers of AIME, October.
Craigg, S.D., 1989, Analysis of spatial geologic data using surface modeling and Geographic Information System software Applications to regional geologic mapping, San Juan structural basin, New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, and Utah (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 73, n. 9, p. 1152.
Cram, I.H., editor, 1971, Future petroleum provinces of the United States Their geology and potential: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 15, v. 1, 803 p., v. 2, p. 805-1496.
Crawford, A.L., editor, 1963, Oil and gas possibilities of Utah, re-evaluated: Utah Geological and Mineralogical Survey Bulletin 54, 525 p.
Cross, T.A., editor, 1990, Quantitative dynamic stratigraphy: Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 625 p.
Crovelli, R.A., 1981, Probabilistic methodology for oil and gas resource appraisal: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-1151, 77 p.
Crovelli, R.A., 1983, Probabilistic methodology for petroleum resource appraisal of wilderness lands, in Miller, B.M.. ed., Petroleum potential of wilderness lands in the Western United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 902, p. 01-05.
Crovelli, R.A., 1984, Procedures for petroleum resource assessment used by the U.S. Geological Survey Statistical and probabilistic methodology, in Masters, C.D., ed., Petroleum resource assessment: International Union of Geologists Science Publication no. 17, p. 24-38.
Crovelli, R.A., 1986, A comparison of analytical and simulation methods for petroleum play analysis and aggregation: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 86-97, 21 p.
Crovelli, R.A., 1987, Probability theory versus simulation of petroleum potential in play analysis, in Albin, S.L., and Harris, C.M., eds., Statistical and computational issues in probability modeling, Pt. 1: Annals of Operations Research, v. 8, p. 363-381.
Crovelli, R.A., 1988, U.S. Geological Survey assessment methodology for estimation of undiscovered petroleum in play analysis of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, in Chung, C.F., Fabbri, A.G., and Sinding-Larsen, R., eds., Quantitative analysis of mineral and energy resources: Dordrecht, Holland, D. Reidel Publishing Company, NATO ASI Series C: Mathematical and physical sciences, v. 223, p. 145-160.
51

Crovelli, R.A., and Balay, R.H., 1984, Computer program directory for petroleum assessment of wilderness lands in the Western United States: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-275, 14 p.
Crovelli, R.A., and Balay, R.H., 1986, FASP, an analytic resource appraisal program for petroleum play analysis: Computers and Geosciences, v. 12, n. 4B, p. 423-475.
Crovelli, R.A., and Balay, R.H., 1988, A microcomputer program for oil and gas resource assessment: Computer Oriented Geological Society, computer contributions, v. 4, n. 3, p. 108-122.
Crovelli, R.A., and Balay, R.H., 1990, FASPU English and metric version Analytic petroleum resource appraisal microcomputer programs for play analysis using a reservoir-engineering model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-509-A, 25 p., and 90-509-B, executable program (5.25" disk).
Crovelli, R.A., and Balay, R.H., 1992, APRAS: Analytic Petroleum Resource Appraisal System - Microcomputer programs for play analysis using a field-size model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 92-21-A, 30 p., and 92-21-B executable program (5.25" disk).
Cubitt, J.M., and Henley, S., editors, 1978, Statistical analysis in geology: Stroundsburg, PA., Dowden, Hutchinson, and Ross, Inc., Benchmark Papers in Geology, vol. 37, 341 p.
Cunningham, D., 1990, Data bases available in the Research Information Center of the National Institute of Standards and Technology: Gaithersburg, MD., U.S. Department of Commerce NIST Special Publication 799, 111 p.
Cunningham, K.I., 1988, Preliminary interpretation of soil-gas data and relationships to other hydrocarbon microseepage indicators, Four Corners platform - San Juan basin transitional area, southwest Colorado and northwest New Mexico, in Fassett, J.E., ed., Geology and coal-bed methane resources of the northern San Juan basin, Colorado and New Mexico: Rocky Mountain Association of Petroleum Geologists guidebook, p. 305-315.
Curiale, J.A., 1991, Oil-source rock correlation A powerful geochemical tool for the petroleum explorationist (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 75, n. 3, p. 560.
Dabrowski, C.E., and Fong, E.N., 1991, Guide to expert system building tools for microcomputers: U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST Special Publication 500-188, 141 p.
Dallmus, K.F., 1958, Mechanics of basin evolution and its relation to the habitat of oil in the basin, in Weeks, L.G., ed., Habitat of oil - A symposium: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, p. 883-931.
Dane, C.H., and Bachman, G.O., 1965, Geologic map of New Mexico: U.S.
52

Geological Survey and New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, scale 1:500,000.
Darton, N.H., 1925, A resume of Arizona geology: Arizona Bureau of Mines Bulletin 119, 298 p.
Data Resources, Incorporated, 1986, Energy review, autumn 1986: Lexington, MA., Data Resources, Inc., 213 p.
Date, C.J., 1983 (reprinted 1985), An introduction to database systems volume II: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Systems Programming Series, 383 p.
Date, C.J., 1986 (reprinted 1988), An introduction to database systems volume I: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Systems Programming Series, 639 p.
Davis, G.H., 1975, Tectonic analysis of folds in the Colorado Plateau of Arizona: Tucson, AZ., Office of Arid Lands Studies, University of Arizona Department of Geosciences, Bulletin #9, 68 p.
Davis, G.H., 1978, Monocline fold pattern of the Colorado Plateau, in Mathews, V., Ill, ed., Laramide folding associated with basement block faulting in the Western United Stated: Geological Society of America Memoir 151, p. 215-233.
Davis, G.H., and VandenDolder, E.M., editors, 1987, Geologic diversity of Arizona and its margins: Excursions to choice areas: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Special Paper No. 5, 422 P-
Davis, J.C., 1986, Statistics and data analysis in geology, 2nd edition: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 646 p.
Davis, R., 1978, Interactive transfer of expertise: The acquisition of new inference rules: Artificial Intelligence, v. 11, n. 1, August, p. 5-24.
Davis, R., 1982, Expert systems: Where are we? And where do we go from here? AI Magazine, v. 3, n. 2, p. 3-22.
Davis, R., 1989, Expert systems: How far can the go? Part 1: AI Magazine, v. 10, n. 1, p. 61-68.
Davis, R., Austin, H., Carlbom, I., Frawley, B. Pruchnik, P., Sneiderman, R., and Gilreath, J.A., 1981, The dipmeter advisor: Interpretation of geologic signals: Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence - 81, p. 846-849.
Davis, R., and Lenat, D.B., 1982, Knowledge-based systems in artifical intelligence: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, 490 p.
Davis, W., 1958, A study of the future productive capacity and probable reserves of the U.S.: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 56, n. 8, Feb.
53

24th, p. 105-119.
Davis, W.S., 1983, Systems analysis and design: A structured approach: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 415 p.
Daviss, B., 1981, Arizona discovery race reaching home stretch: Western Oil Reporter, v. 38, n. 11, p. 67-68.
Day, D.T., 1909, The petroleum resources of the U.S., in Papers on the conservation of mineral resources: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 394, p. 30-61.
Day, J., 1991, Computer mappers sketch new applications for craft: The Denver Post, September 18th, business news section.
Day, J., 1992, CIS industry gains power as it expands: The Denver Post, May 12th, business news section.
Deering, M.F., 1985, Architectures for AI: Byte, April, p. 193-206.
DeFord, R.K., and Kehle, R.O., chairmen, 1976, Geothermal gradient map of North America: American Association of Petroleum Geologists and U.S. Geological Survey, scale 1:5,000,000.
DeGolyer, E,, 1951, On the estimation of undiscovered oil reserves: Journal of Petroleum Technology, Jan., p. 9-10.
DeGolyer and MacNaughton, 1989, Twentieth Century petroleum statistics: Dallas, TX., DEGolyer and MacNaughton, 126 p.
Demaison, G., and Huizinga, B.J., 1991, Genetic classification of petroleum systems (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 75, n. 3, p. 558-559.
Demaison, G., and Murris, R.J., editors, 1984, Petroleum geochemistry and basin evaluation: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 35, 426 p.
Denham, L.R., 1985, Expert systems in seismic exploration (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 69, p. 249.
Denton, M., Kuo, Tsai-Bao, and Startzman, R., 1989, Putting 'smart' tools to work: Geobyte, August, 1989, p. 8-14.
Desborough, G.A., Poole, F.G., Daws, T.A., and Scarbourough, R., 1984, Hydrocarbon source rock evaluation of the Middle Proterozoic Apache Group Gila County, Arizona, in Woodward, J., and others, eds., Hydrocarbon source rocks of the Greater Rocky Mountain region: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists Symposium, p. 51-55.
Dickey, P.A., 1986, Petroleum development geology, 3rd Edition: Tulsa, OK., PennWell Publishing Company, 530 p.
Dickinson, W.R., 1981, Plate tectonic evolution of the southern Cordil-
54

lera, in Dickinson, W.R., and Payne, W.D., eds., Relations of tectonics to ore deposits in the southern Cordillera: Arizona Geological Society Digest vol. XIV, p. 113-135.
Doeringsfeld, W.W., Amuedo, C.L., and Ivey, J.B., 1958, Generalized tectonic map of the Black Mesa basin showing major structural features, in Black Mesa basin: New Mexico Geological Society guidebook, 9th Field Conference, p. 145.
Dolton, G.L., and 12 others, 1981, Estimates of undiscovered recoverable conventional resources of oil and gas in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 860, 87 p.
Dolton, G.L., Mast, R.F., and Crovelli, R.A., 1992, Undiscovered oil and gas resources of federal lands and waters (abst.), in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources, 1992: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1074, McKelvey Forum, p. 21-22.
Dott, R.H., Jr., and Batten, R.L., 1971, Evolution of the Earth: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Book Company, 649 p.; also, 1976, 2nd Edition, 504 p.
Douglas, J.H., 1974, The oil that wasn't there: Science News, v. 105, April 27th, 1974, p. 277-278.
Dowds, J.P., 1969, statistical geometry of petroleum reservoirs in exploration and exploitation: Journal of Petroleum Technology, p. 841-852.
Drew, L.J., 1974, Estimation of exploration success and the effects of resource base exhaustion via a simulation model: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1328, 25 p.
Drew, L.J., 1975, Analysis of a petroleum deposit success ratio curve: Mathematical Geology, v. 7, n. 5/6.
Drew, L.J., 1990, Oil and gas forecasting - Reflections of a petroleum geologist: New York, NY., Oxford University Press, 252 p.
Drew, L.J., Attanasi, E.D., and Root, D.H., 1979, Importance of physical parameters in petroleum supply models: New York University, The Economics of Exploration for Energy Resources Conference, May 17-18, 1979.
Drew, L.J., Attanasi, E.D., and Schuenemeyer, J.H., 1988, Observed oil oil and gas field size distribution: A consequence of the discovery process and the prices of oil and gas: Mathematical Geology, v. 20, n. 8, p. 939-953.
Drew, L.J., Grender, G.C., and Turner, R.M., 1983, Atlas of discovery rate profiles showing oil and gas discovery rates by geologic province in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-0075, 259 p.
55

Drew, L.J., and Root, D.H., 1982, Statistical estimates of tomorrow's offshore oil and gas fields: Ocean Industry, v. 17, n. 5, p. 54-66.
Drew, L.J., Schuenemeyer, J.H., and Attanasi, E.D., 1988, A rationale for the method of estimating the number of small undiscovered oil and gas fields (abst.), in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources 1988, Program and abstracts for McKelvey Forum: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1025, p. 14.
Drew, L.J., Schuenemeyer, J.H., and Bawiec, W.J., 1982, Estimation of the future rates of oil and gas discoveries in the Gulf of Mexico: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1252, 26 p.
Drew, L.J., Schuenemeyer, J.H., Root, D.H., and Attanasi, E.D., 1980, Petroleum-resource appraisal and discovery rate forecasting in partially explored regions: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1138, 40 p. (3 separate chapters as P.P. 1138-A, B, and C).
Dreyfus, H.L., 1972, What computers can't do: A critique of artificial reason: New York, NY., Harper and Row Publishers, Inc.
Duda, R.O., 1978, Semantic network representations in rule-based inference systems, in Waterman, D., and Hayes-Roth, F., eds., Patterndirected inference systems: New York, NY., Academic Press, p. 203-221.
Duda, R.O., 1980, The PROSPECTOR system for mineral exploration: Menlo Park, CA., SRI International, Artificial Intelligence Center, project report 8172, April 1980, 120 p.
Duda, R.O., 1981a, Operation manual for the PROSPECTOR consultant system: Menlo Park, CA., SRI International, Artificial Intelligence Center, project 8172, 75 p.
Duda, R.O., 1981b, Knowledge-based expert systems come of age: Byte, v. 6, n. 9, Sept., p. 238-281
Duda, R.O., and Gaschnig, J.C., 1981, Knowledge-based expert systems come of age: Byte, v. 6, n. 9, September, p. 238-281.
Duda, R.O., Gaschnig, J., and Hart, P., 1979, Model design in the PROSPECTOR consultation system for mineral exploration, in Michie, D., ed., Expert systems in the microelectronic age: Edinburgh, Scotland, Edinburgh University Press, p. 153-167.
Duda, R.O., Hart, P.E., Nilsson, N.J., Reboh, R., Slocum, J., and Sutherland, G., 1977, Development of a computer-based consultant for mineral exploration: Menlo Park, CA., SRI International, Artificial Intelligence Center, Technical Report, October.
Duda, R.O., and others, 1978, Development of the PROSPECTOR Consultation System for mineral exploration: Menlo Park, CA., SRI International, Artificial Intelligence Center, Technical Report, October
56

Duda, R.O., Hart, P.E., and Nilsson, N.J., 1976, Subjective Bayesian methods for rule-based inference systems, in Proceedings of the National Computer Conference, p. 1075-1082.
Duda, R.O., and Reboh, R., 1984, AI and decision making: The PROSPECTOR experience, in Reitman, W., ed., Artificial intelligence applications for business: Norwood, NJ., Ablex, p. 111-148.
Duda, R.O., and Shortliffe, E.H., 1983, Expert systems research: Science, v. 220, n. 4594, April 15th, p. 261-268.
Duncan, D.C., and Swanson, V.E., 1965, Orgaic-rich shale of the United States and world land areas: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 523, 30 p.
Dupree, W.G., Jr., and Corsentino, J.S., 1975, United States energy through the year 2000 (revised): U.S. Bureau of Mines, (unspecified publication type), 65 p.
Dvorak, J.C., 1989, Inside Track: Neural networks turn your computer into an electronic brain. Look out!: PC Magazine, Jan. 17th.
Dym, C.L., and Mittal, S., 1985, Knowledge acquisition from multiple experts: AI Magazine, v. 6, summer, p. 32-37.
Dyman, T.S., 1978, Data on 80,000 fields available to industry: World Oil, v. 186, n. 1, p. 109-116.
Eardley, A.J., 1951, Structural geology of North America: New York, NY., Harper and Brothers Publishers, 624 p.
Eckbo, P., Jacoby, H., and Smith, J., 1978, Oil supply forecasting: A disaggregated approach: Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, v. 9, p. 218-235.
Edgar, N.T., and Bayer, K.C., 1979, Assessing oil and gas resources on the U.S. continental margin: Oceanus, v. 22, n. 3, p. 13-22.
Edwards, W., 1982, Conservatism in human information processing, in Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., and Tversky, A., eds., Judgment under uncertainy: Heuristics and biases: New York, NY., Cambridge University Press, p. 359-369.
Egloff, G., 1952, Oil and gas as industrial raw materials, in Resources for freedom, Volume IV, The promise of technology: Washington, D.C., The President's Materials Policy Committee, p. 193-204.
Elliott, M.A., and Linden, H.R., 1968, A new analysis of U.S. natural gas supplies: Journal of Petroleum Technology, v. 20, p. 135-141.
Elston, W.E., 1960, Structural development and Paleozoic stratigraphy of Black Mesa basin, northeastern Arizona and surrounding area: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 44, p. 21-36.
57

Energy Information Administration, 1990, U.S. oil and gas reserves by year of field discovery: EIA, Office of Oil and Gas, U.S. Department of Energy, DOE/EIA-0534, 137 p.
Energy Information Administration, 1991, Petroleum: An energy profile: EIA, Office of Oil and Gas, U.S. Department of Energy, DOE/EIA0545(91), 93 p.
England, W.A., and Fleet, A.J., editors, 1991, Petroleum migration: The Geological Society Special Publication 59, 280 p.
Ennis, S.P., 1983, Expert systems - An emerging computer technology: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 81, n. 30, p. 184-188.
Ernst, W.G., editor, 1988, Metamorphism and crustal evolution of the Western United States: Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice Hall, Inc., Rubey Volume VII, 153 p.
Etherington, D.W., 1988, Reasoning with incomplete information: Research notes in artificial intelligence: Los Altos, CA., Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 240 p.
Exxon Company, U.S.A., 1976, U.S. oil and gas potential: Houston, TX., Exxon Company, Exploration Department, March, 1976, 10 p.
Exxon Company, U.S.A., 1979, Energy outlook, 1980-2000: Houston, TX., Exxon Company, December.
Fang, J.H., Shultz, A.W., and Chen, H.C., 1986, Expert sytems and petroleum exploration: An overview: Geobyte, winter 1986, p. 6-11.
Fassett, J.E., editor, 1975, Canyonlands country: Four Corners Geological Society, 8th Field Conference guidebook, 281 p.
Fassett, J.E., editor, 1978 and 1983, Oil and gas fields of the Four Corners area, volumes I, II, and III: Four Corners Geological Society, 1,143 p.
Federal Interagency Coordinating Committee on Digital Cartography, 1988, A summary of CIS activities in the Federal Government: Office of Management and Budget, FICCDC, Reports Working Group, August, 45 p.
Feigenbaum, E.A., 1977, The art of artificial intelligence: I. Themes and case studies of knowledge engineering, in Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Cambridge, MA., August, p. 1,014-1029.
Feinstein, J.L., and Siems, F., 1985, EDAAS: An expert system at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for avoiding disclosure of confidential business information: Expert Systems, v. 2, n. 2, April, p. 72-85.
58

Feldman, J.A., 1985, Connections: Massive parallelism in natural and artificial intelligence: Byte, April, 1985, p. 277-284.
Feldman, J.A., and Ballard, D.H., 1982, Connectionist models and their properties: Cognitive Science, v. 6, p. 205-254.
Feldman, J.A., Fanty, M.A., Gooddard, N.H., and Lynne, K.J., 1988, Computing with structured connectionist networks: Communications of the ACM (Association for Computing Machinery), v. 31, n. 2, February, p. 170-187.
Fenneman, N.M., 1928, Physiographic divisions of the United States: Association of American Geographers Annals, 3rd Edition, v. 18, n. 4, p. 261-353.
Ferrigno, C., 1991, Atlas CIS: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Developments, August, v. 8, issue 8, p. 240-245.
Fetzer, J.H., editor, 1988, Aspects of artificial intelligence: Boston, MA., Kluwer Academic Publishers, 385 p.
Fetzner, R.W., 1960, Pennsylvanian paleotectonics of the Colorado Plateau: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 44, p. 1371-1413.
Finch, W.I., Granger, B.C., Lupe, R., and McCammon, R.B., 1980, Research on uranium resource models, a progess report, Part I: Genetic-geologic models; a systematic approach to evaluate geologic favorability for undiscovered uranium resources, 157 p. with parts I, II, and III.
Fischer, A.G., and Judson, S., 1975, Petroleum and global tectonics: Princeton, NJ., Princeton University Press, 322 p.
Fisher, P., and Mackaness, W., 1987, Are cartographic expert systems possible?, in Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Automated Cartography, Baltimore, MD., March, 1987, p. 530-534.
Fisher, W.L., 1987, Can the U.S. oil and gas resource base support sustained production? Science, June 26th, v. 236, p. 1631-1636.
Fisher, W.L., and 6 others, 1988, An assessment of the natural gas resource base of the United States: Texas Bureau of Economic Geology, 77 p.
Fleming, C.C., and von Halle, B., 1989, Handbook of relational database design: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 605 p.
Foord, E.E., McKee, E.D., and Bowles, C.G., 1978, Status of mineral resource information for Shivwits Plateau, Parashant, Andrus, and Whitmore Canyons, and Kanab Canyon areas, Grand Canyon, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Administrative Report for the National Park Service, 30 p.
59

Forman, D.J., and Hinde, A.L., 1985, Improved statistical method for assessment of undiscovered petroleum resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 69, p. 106-118.
Foster, N.H., and Beaumont, E.A., compilers, 1987, Geologic basins I, classification, modeling, and predictive stratigraphy: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Treatise of Petroleum Geology Reprint Series no. 1, 458 p.
Foster, N.H., and Beaumont, E.A., compilers, 1992, Oil is first found in the mind: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Treatise on Petroleum Geology, Reprint Series, variable pagination.
Fouch, T.D., and Magathan, E.R., editors, 1980, Paleozoic paleogeography of the West-central United States: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Rocky Mountain Section, Symposium 1, 431 p.
Fowler, M.L., 1987, SRPS: A knowledge-based system for predicting source rock potential: Geobyte, v. 2, n. 4, p. 24-30.
Fox, J., 1984, Expert systems - State of the art report: Maidenhead, Berkshire, England, Pergamon Infotech Limited, Series 12, n. 7, 206 p.
Fox, J., 1990, User's guide to structured query language: PC Today Computers in Plain English: v. 4, n. 11, p. 45-51.
Frazier, W.J., and Schwimmer, D.R., 1987, Regional stratigraphy of North America: New York, NY., Plenum Press Publishing Corporation, 719 p.
Frederick, D.G., 1992, Geographic databases - Need your help: Geotimes, July, v. 37, n. 7, p. 5.
Freiling, M., Alexander, J., Messick, S., Rehfuss, S., and Shulman, S., 1985, Starting a knowledge engineering project: A step-by-step approach: AI Magazine, v. 6, n. 3, Fall, p. 150-164.
Frezon, S.E., Finn, T.M., and Lister, J.M., 1984, Total thickness of sedimentary rocks in the conterminous United States: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-0920, scale 1:5,000,000.
Friedman, G.M., and Sanders, J.E., 1978, Principles of sedimentology: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 792 p.
Fritz, M., 1985, ^Experts' cure exploration itch: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Explorer, v. 6, n. 7, p. 40-41.
Frost, E.G., and Martin, D.L., editors, 1982, Mesozoic-Cenozoic tectonic evolution of the Colorado River region, California, Arizona, and Nevada: San Diego, CA., Cordilleran Publishers, in conjunction with Geological Society of America Symposium and Field Conference, Anderson-Hamilton volume, 608 p.
Gale, W.A., editor, 1986, Artificial intelligence and statistics:
60

Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 418 p.
Gallant, S.I., 1985, Automatic generation of expert systems from examples, in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications: New York, NY., Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Press, Dec. 11-13, 1985, Miami Beach, FL., p. 313-319.
Gallant, S.I., 1987, Bayesian assessment of a connectionist model for fault detection: Boston, MA., Northeastern University, College of Computer Science, Technical Report NU-CCS-87-25.
Gallant, S.I., 1988, Connectionist expert systems: Communications of the ACM (Association of Computing Machinery), v. 31, n. 2, p. 152-169.
Ganascia, J.G., 1984, Using an expert system in merging qualitative and quantitative data analysis: International Journal of ManMachine Studies, v. 20, n. 3, March, p. 319-330.
Gardner, L.S., 1952, The Hurricane Fault, in Guidebook to the geology of Utah: Intermountain Association of Petroleum Geologists and Utah Geological Society, guidebook #7, p. 15-21
Garfias, V.R., and Whetsel, R.V., 1936, Proven oil reserves: American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers Transactions, v. 118, p. 211-214.
Garland, T.M., Carrales, M., Jr., and Convay, J.S., 1974, Assessment of U.S. petroleum supply with varying drilling efforts: U.S. Department of The Interior, Bureau of Mines, Information Circular 8634, 36 p.
Garrett, W.E., editor, 1985 (2nd printing 1987), Atlas of North America, space age portrait of a continent: Washington, D.C., National Geographic Society, 264 p.
Gaschnig, J., 1979, Preliminary performance analysis of the PROSPECTOR consultant system for mineral exploration, in Proceedings of the Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Tokyo, Japan, p. 308-310.
Gaschnig, J., 1981, PROSPECTOR: An expert system for mineral exploration: Infotech, Machine Intelligence, State of the Art Report 9, n. 3.
Gaschnig, J., 1982a, Application of the PROSPECTOR system to geological exploration problems, in Hayes, J.E., Michie, D., and Pao, Y.H., eds., Machine Intelligence, v. 10: Chichester, England.
Gaschnig, J., 1982b, PROSPECTOR: An expert system for mineral exploration, in Michie, D., ed., Introductory readings in expert systems: Copper Station NY., NY., Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Inc.
61

Gaschnig, J., Reboh, R., and Reiter, J., 1981, Development of a knowledge-based expert system for water resource problems: Menlo Park, CA., SRI International, Artificial Research Center, Report 1691, August.
Gehman, H.M., Baker, R.A., and White, D.A., 1975, Prospect risk analysis, in Davis, J.C., Doveton, J.H., and Harbaugh, J.W., conveners, Probability methods in oil exploration: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Research Symposium Notes, Stanford University, p. 16-20.
Gehman, H.M., Baker, R.A., and White, D.A., 1980, Assessment methodology, an industry viewpoint, in Assessment of undiscovered oil and gas: United Nations ESCAP, CCOP Technical Publication 10, p. 113-121.
Geographic Information Systems World, 1990, The 1990 GIS sourcebook: Ft. Collins, CO., GIS World, Inc., 356 p.
Geographic Information Systems World, 1991, Federal GIS conference makes impressive debut: GIS World, September, v. 4, n. 6, p. 66-67.
Gerrard, T.A., 1966, Environmental studies of Fort Apache Member, Supai Formation, east-central Arizona: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 50, p. 2434-2463.
Gershman, A., 1982, Building a geological expert system for dipmeter interpretation: Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, p. 139-142.
Gess, G., 1975, Methodology of hydrocarbon resource appraisal in relationship to the "petroleum zone" concept and probabilistic calculation, in Grenon, M., ed., First ITASA Conference on Energy Resources: Laxenburg, Austria, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, p. 361-371.
Gess, G., and Bois, C., 1977, Study of petroleum zones A contribution to the appraisal of hydrocarbon resources, in Meyer, R.F., ed., The future supply of nature-made petroleum and gas: New York, NY., Pergamon Press, Inc., p. 155-178.
Gevarter, W.B., 1983, Expert systems: Limited but powerful: IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) Spectrum, v. 20, n. 8, p. 39-45.
Gevarter, W.B., 1984a, Artificial intelligence, expert systems, computer vision and natural language processing: Park Ridge, NJ., Noyes Publications, 226 p.
Gevarter, W.B., 1984b, Expert systems: An overview, vol. 2: Orinda, CA., Business/Technology Books, Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Series, 64 p.
Gevarter, W.B., 1987, The nature and evaluation of commercial expert system building tools: Computer, v. 20, n. 5, p. 24-41.
62

Giardina, S., Jr., 1979, Geologic review of northwestern Arizona for petroleum exploration investigators: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission Special Publication No. 4, 72 p.
Gibson, J.D., Howell, D.G., Fuis, G.S., and Vedder, J.G., 1985, North American continental - ocean transect C-3: Pacific abyssal plain to the Rio Grande Rift: Geological Society of America Centennial Continental/ocean Transect #5, 23 p.
Gillespie, J.B., and Bentley, C.B., 1971, Geohydrology of Hualapai and Sacramento Valleys, Mohave County, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 1899-H, 37 p., scale 1:125,000.
Gillette, R., 1974, Oil and gas resources Did the USGS gush too high?: Science, v. 185, n. 4,146, p. 127-130.
Gillette, R., 1975, Oil and gas resources: Academy calls USGS math "misleading": Science, v. 187, Feb. 28th, 1975, p. 723-727.
Gilluly, J., 1963, The tectonic evolution of the Western United States: Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London, v. 119, p. 133-174.
Ginsberg, A., 1988, Automatic refinement of expert system knowledge bases: Los Altos, CA., Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 176 p.
Godson, R.H., 1981, Digital terrain map of the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Investigations Map 1-1318, scale 1:7,500,000.
Goldberg, M., Alvo, M., and Karam, G., 1984, The analysis of LANDSAT imagery using an expert system: Forestry applications, in Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Automated Cartography, Ottawa, Ontario, March, 1984, p. 493-503
Gordon, S.E., Gill, R.T., and Dingus, T.A., 1987, Designing for the user: The role of human factors in expert system development: AI Applications, v. 1, n. 1, p. 35-46.
Gorham, F.D., Jr., 1975, Tectogenesis of the central Colorado Plateau aulacogen, in Fassett, J.E., ed., Canyonlands country guidebook: Four Corners Geological Society, 8th Field Conference, p. 211-216.
Graham, I.M., and Milne, R.W., editors, 1991, Research and development in expert systems VIII: New York, NY., Cambridge University Press, Proceedings of llth Annual Technical Conference of British Computer Society Specialist Group, London, Conference Series 4, 274 p.
Grant, P.R., Jr., and Foster, R.W., 1989, Future petroleum provinces in New Mexico Discovering new reserves: New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, 94 p.
Gregory, H.E., 1950, Geology and geography of the Zion National Park
63

region, Utah and Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 220, 200 p.
Gretener, P.E., 1981, Geothermics: Using temperature in hydrocarbon exploration: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Continuing Education Course Notes Series 17, 156 p.
Gries, R., 1983, Oil and gas prospecting beneath Precambrian of foreland thrust plates in Rocky Mountains: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 67, p. 1-28.
Grim, P.J., and Berry, G.W., 1979, Geothermal energy in the Western United States, in Muffler, L.J.P., ed., Assessment of geothermal resources of the United States - 1978: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 790 in cooperation with National Geophysics and SolarTerrestrial Data Center, scale 1:2,500,000.
Grossberg, S., 1982, Studies of mind and brain: Dordrecht, Holland, D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Grossberg, S., 1987, Recent developments in the design of real-time non-linear neural network architectures, in Caudill, M., and Butler, C., eds., Proceedings of the First International Conference on Neural Networks, volume I: IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers), June, San Diego, CA., SOS Printing.
Guffanti, M., and Nathenson, M., 1980, Preliminary map of temperature gradients in the conterminous United States: Geothermal Research Council Transactions, v. 4, p. 53-56.
Guidish, T.M., Kendall, C.G.St.C., Lerche, I., Toth, D.J., and Yarzab, R.F., 1985, Basin evaluation using burial history calculations: An overview: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 69, p. 92-105.
Gurget, K.D., cartographic editor, 1983, Energy resources map of Utah: Utah Geological and Mineral Survey Map 68, scale 1:500,000.
Gustafson, V.O., 1981, Petroleum geology of the Devonian and Mississippian rocks of the Four Corners region, in Wiegand, D.L., ed., Geology of the Paradox basin: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists Field Conference, p. 101-109.
Gutman, S.I., and Heckmann, G.A., 1977, An integration of LANDSAT and geophysical data in northeastern Arizona: unpublished report for U.S. Geological Survey, contract #94599, and Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, 80 p.
Hack, J.T., 1942, Sedimentation and volcanism in the Hopi Buttes, Arizona: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 53, p. 335-372.
Hager, D., 1948, Gas and oil possibilities in northeast Arizona: Phoenix, AZ., Arizona State Land Department, 19 p.
64

Hager, D., 1951, The search for oil in Utah and northern Arizona: Golden, CO., Colorado School of Mines Alumni Association, Mines Magazine, v. 41, n. 10, p. 51-56.
Hahman, W.R., Sr., Stone, C., and Witcher, J.C., compilers, 1978, Preliminary map of geothermal energy resources of Arizona, Geothermal Map No. 1: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology for U.S. Department of Energy, scale 1:1,000,000.
Halbouty, M.T., 1968, Giant oil and gas fields in United States: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 52, p. 11151151.
Halbouty, M.T., editor, 1986, Future petroleum provinces of the World: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 40, Proceedings of the Wallace E. Pratt Memorial Conference, Phoenix, December, 1984, 708 p.
Halbouty, M.T., editor, 1992, Giant oil and gas fields of the decade, 1978-1988: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 54, 526 p.
Halbouty, M.T., Meyerhoff, A., Dott, R., King, R.E., and Klemme, H.D., 1970, World's giant oil and gas fields: Geologic factors affecting their formation, and basin classification, in Halbouty, M.T., ed., Geology of giant petroleum fields: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 14, p. 502-555.
Halbouty, M.T., and Moody, J.D., 1980, World ultimate reserves of crude oil: Bucharest, 10th World Petroleum Congress, 1979, Proceedings, v. 2, p. 291-301.
Hambleton, W.W., Davis, J.C., and Doveton, J.H., 1975, Estimating exploration potential, in Haun, J.D., ed., Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology No. 1, p. 171-185.
Hamblin, W.K., 1965, Origin of "reverse drag" on the down-thrown side of normal faults: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 76, p. 1145-1164.
Hamblin, W.K., 1970, Structure of the western Grand Canyon region, in Hamblin, W.K., and Best, M.G., eds., Guidebook to the geology of Utah: Utah Geological Society, number 23, p. 3-19.
Hansen, A.R., Moulton, F.C., and Owings, B.F., 1980, Utah-Arizona overthrust hingeline belt: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 78, Nov. 24th, p. 188-199.
Hansen, G.H., and Bell, M.M., compilers, 1949, The oil and gas possibilities of Utah: Utah Geological and Mineralogical Survey, 341 p.
Harbaugh, J.W., and Bonham-Carter, G., 1981 (reprinted 1970 edition), Computer simulation in geology: Malabar, FL., Robert E. Krieger
65

Publishing Company, Inc., 575 p.
Harding, T.P., and Lowell, J.D., 1979, Structural styles, their platetectonic habitats and hydrocarbon traps in petroleum provinces: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 63, p. 1016-1058.
Harmon, P., and King, D., 1985, Expert systems - Artificial intelligence in business: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 283 p.
Harnad, S., 1989, Minds, machines and Searle: Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, v. 1, n. 1, p. 5-25.
Harris, C.M., 1982, Log-normal resource bases and negative expotential finding rates: U.S. Department of Energy, unpublished memorandum, June 16, 1982, 5 p.
Harris, D.P., 1977, Conventional crude oil resources of the United States Recent estimates, methods of estimation and policy considerations: Materials and Society, v. 1, p. 263-286.
Harris, D.P., 1984, Mineral resources appraisal: New York, NY., Oxford University Press, 445 p.
Harris, L.R., 1989, Judgmentware: AI programs that can embody judgment offer high-payback opportunities: CIO, May, p. 60-62.
Harrison, G.C., 1976, Facies analysis of the Devonian of the Black Mesa basin, Arizona: unpublished M.S. thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ., 57 p.
Harrison, W.E., 1986, Petroleum source-rock and temperature history studies in sparsely tested exploration areas, in Meyers, R.F., ed., Shallow oil and gas resources: United Nations Institute for Training and Research, Proceedings of the First International Conference, p. 11-34.
Harshbarger, J.W., Repenning, C.A., and Irwin, J.H., 1957, Stratigraphy of the uppermost Triassic and the Jurassic rocks of the Navajo country: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 291, 74 p.
Hart, P.E., Duda, R.O., and Einaudi, M.T., 1978, PROSPECTOR A computer-based consultation system for mineral exploration: Mathematical Geology, v. 10, n. 5, p. 589-610.
Hartley, Sir Harold, 1969, The future of world energy: New Scientist, Nov. 13, 1969, p. 3-5.
Hastings, D., 1992, Public domain or low-cost CIS systems: An introductory guide: The Computer Oriented Geological Society, COGS Letter, September, p. 1, 4, 7, 9.
Hatch, H.J., 1986, Overview of geographic information systems in the
66

federal government, in Opitz, B., ed., Geographic Information Systems in government: Hampton, VA., A. Deepak Publishing Company, p. xvii-xx.
Haugeland, J., editor, 1980, Mind design: Philosophy, psychology, artificial intelligence: Cambridge, MA., MIT Press.
Haun, J.D., editor, 1971, Origin of petroleum - Selected papers reprinted from AAPG Bulletin 1950-1969: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Reprint Series No. 1, 192 p.
Haun, J.D., editor, 1974, Origin of petroleum II: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Reprint Series No. 9, 210 p.
Haun, J.D., editor, 1975, Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology #1, 206 p.
Haun, J.D., and Kent, H.C., 1965, Geologic history of Rocky Mountain region: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 49, p. 1781-1800.
Haun, J.D., and LeRoy, L.W., editors, 1958, Subsurface geology in petroleum exploration, a symposium: Boulder, CO., Johnson Printing Company, Colorado School of Mines, 887 p.
Hayes, E.T., 1979, Energy resources available to the United States, 1985-2000: Science, v. 203, n. 4377, Jan. 19th, p. 233-239.
Hayes-Roth, F., 1984, The industrialization of knowledge engineering, in Reitman, W., ed., Artificial intelligence applications for business: Norwood, NJ., Ablex.
Hayes-Roth, F., 1985, Rule-based systems: Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, v. 28, n. 9, September, p. 921-932.
Hayes-Roth, F., Waterman, D., and Lenat, D., editors, 1983, Building expert systems: Reading, MA., Addison-Vesley Publishing Company, 444 p.
Haynes, H.J., chairman, 1976, Enhanced oil recovery: National Petroleum Council report, 231 p.
Heald, K.C., 1950, Major oil fields of the United States and Canada: Geological Association of Canada Proceedings, 1950, v. 3, p. 13-25.
Hedberg, H.D., 1975, False precision in petroleum resource estimates, in Haun, J.D., ed., Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology No. 1, p. 160.
Heicht-Nielsen, T., 1987, Counter-propagation networks, in Caudill, M., and Butler, C., eds., Proceedings of the First International Confer-
67

ence on Neural Networks, volume I: IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers), June, San Diego, CA., SOS Printing.
Heivly, C., and White, T., 1987, Accessing large spatial databases via a microcomputer: Proceedings of Auto Carto VIII, p. 623-629.
Helmstaedt, H., 1974, Overplating: A major factor in the tectonic evolution of the Colorado Plateau (abst.): EOS Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, v. 55, p. 448.
Hendricks, T.A., 1965, Resources of oil, gas, and natural-gas liquids in the United States and the world: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 522, 20 p.
Hendricks, T.A., 1975, Estimating resources of crude oil and natural gas in inadequately explored areas, in Haun, J.D., ed., Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology No. 1, p. 1922.
Hepner, G., Logan, T., Ritter, N., and Bryant, N., 1990, Artificial neural network classification using a minimal training set: Comparison to conventional supervised classification: Journal of Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, April, v. 56, n. 4, p. 469-473.
Heroux, Y., Chagnon, A., and Bertrand, R., 1979, Compilation and correlation of major thermal maturation indicators: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 63, p. 2128-2144.
Hertz, J., Krogh, A., and Palmer, R.G., 1991, Introduction to the theory of neural computation: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Lecture Notes Volume I, 327 p.
Heylmun, E.B., 1958a, Paleozoic stratigraphy and oil possibilities of Kaiparowits region, Utah: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 42, p. 1781-1811.
Heylmun, E.B., 1958b, Oil and gas possibilities around the laccolithtype intrusions in the Colorado Plateau, in Sanborn, A.F., ed., Guidebook to the geology of the Paradox basin: Intermountain Association of Petroleum Geologists, 9th Field Conference, p. 238240.
Heylmun, E.B., 1960, Kanab: The oil signs are there: Oil and gas Journal, v. 58, n. 24, p. 168-171.
Heylmun, E.B., 1964, Shallow oil and gas possibilities in east and southcentral Utah: Utah Geological and Mineralogical Survey Special Studies No. 8, 39 p.
Heylmun, E.B., 1981, Geology of promising Holbrook basin: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 79, p. 117-118, 123.
Hildenbrand, T.G., Simpson, R.W., Godson, R.H., and Kane, M.F., 1982,
68

Digital colored residual and regional Bouguer gravity maps of the conterminous United States with cut-off wavelengths of 250 km and 1,000 km: U.S. Geological Survey Geophysical Investigations Map GP-953-A, scale 1:7,500,000.
Hill, G.W., 1982, Resource-estimation models and predicted discovery, in deMarsily, G., and Merrian, D.F., eds., Predictive geology - with emphasis on nuclear-waste disposal: New York, NY., Pergamon Press, Inc., Computers and Geology, v. 4, p. 191-204.
Hill, K.E., Hammar, H.D., and Winger, J.G., 1957, Future growth of the world petroleum industry: New York, NY., The Chase Manhattan Bank, 44 p.
Hinton, G.E., 1985, Learning in parallel networks: Simulating learning in a probabilistic system: Byte, April, 1985, p. 265-273.
Hinton, G.E., 1989, Connectionist learning: Procedures: Artificial Intelligence, v. 40, n. 1-3, Sept., p. 185-234.
Hinton, G.E., 1992, How neural networks learn from experience: Scientic American, v. 267, n. 3, Sept., Special Issue, p. 144-151.
Hintze, L.F., compiler, 1980, Geologic map of Utah: Utah Geological and Mineralogical Survey, scale 1:500,000.
Hirsch, R.L., 1987, Impending United States energy crisis: Science, v. 235, March 20th, 1987, p. 1,467-1,473.
Hodgson, R.A., 1961, Regional study of jointing in Comb Ridge - Navajo Mountain area, Arizona and Utah: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 45, p. 1-38.
Hohn, E.M., 1988, Geostatistics and petroleum geology: New York, NY., Van Nostrand Reinhold, 264 p.
Hollander, C.R., and Iwasaki, Y., 1983, The drilling advisor: An expert system application: Teknowledge, Fundamentals of knowledge engineering report.
Holm, D.A., 1938, The oil possibilities of Arizona: Phoenix, AZ., State Land Department, State of Arizona, 47 p.
Hood, A., Gutjahr, C.C.M., and Heacock, R.L., 1975, Organic metamorphism and the generation of petroleum: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 59, p. 986-996.
Hopkins, G.R., 1950, A projection of oil discovery 1949-1965: Journal of Petroleum Technology, June, sec. 2, p. 6-10.
Houghton, J.C., 1988, Use of the truncated shifted Pareto distribution in assessing size distribution of oil and gas fields: Mathematical Geology, v. 20, n. 8, p. 907-938.
69

Howell, D.G., Gibson, J.D., Fuis, G.S., Knapp, J.H., Haxel, G.B., Keller, B.R., Silver, L.T., and Vedder, J.G., 1985, C-3 Pacific abyssal plain to the Rio Grande Rift: Geological Society of America Centennial Continental/Ocean Transect #5, 3 sheets.
Howell, J., 1992, S-trees: A new way to handle subjective rules: AI Expert Magazine, v. 7, n. 2, Feb., p. 20-25.
Howson, C., and Urbach, P., 1989, Scientific reasoning: The Bayesian approach: La Salle, IL., Open Court Publishing Company, 312 p.
Hubbert, M.K., 1956, Nuclear energy and the fossil fuels: New York, NY., American Petroleum Institute, Drilling and Production Practice (1956), p. 7-25.
Hubbert, M.K., 1962, Energy resources: National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council publication 1000-D, 141 p.
Hubbert, M.K., 1967, Degree of advancement of petroleum exploration in the United States: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 51, p. 2207-2227.
Hubbert, M.K., 1969, Energy resources, in Resources and man: San Francisco, CA., W.H. Freeman and Company, p. 157-242.
Hubbert, M.K., 1971, The energy resources of the Earth: Scientific American, v. 224, n. 3, Sept., p. 60-70.
Hubbert, M.K., 1973, Survey of world energy resources: The Canadian Mining and Metallurgical Bulletin, v. 66, n. 735, p. 37-54.
Hubbert, M.K., 1974, U.S. energy resources, a review as of 1972, pt. 1, in A national fuels and energy policy study: U.S. 93rd Congress, 2nd Session, Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, Committee Print, Serial No. 93-40 (92-75), 267 p.
Hubbert, M.K., 1982, Techniques of predictions as applied to the production of oil and gas: U.S. Department of Energy, Symposium on oil and gas supply modeling, June 18-20, 1980, National Bureau of Standards Special Publication 631, p. 16-141.
Huddle, J.W., and Dobrovolny, E., 1945, Late Paleozoic stratigraphy of central and northeastern Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Oil and Gas Investigations Preliminary Chart #10.
Huddle, J.W., and Dobrovolny, E., 1952, Devonian and Mississippian rocks of central Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 233D, p. 67-112.
Hudson, H.K., 1963, Is the "song of plenty" a siren song?: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 61, n. 24, p. 131-136.
Hughes, P.W., 1952, Stratigraphy of the Supai Formation, Chino Valley, Yavapai County, Arizona: American Association of Petroleum Geolo-
70

gists Bulletin, v. 36, p. 635-657.
Hunt, C.B., 1942, New interpretation of some laccolithic mountains and its possible bearing on structural traps for oil and gas: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 26, p. 197-203,
Hunt, C.B., 1956, Cenozoic geology of the Colorado Plateau: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 279, 99 p.
Hunt, J.M., 1979, Petroleum geochemistry and geology: San Francisco, CA., V.H. Freeman and Company, 617 p.
Huntoon, P.V., 1976, The post-Paleozoic structural geology of the eastern Grand Canyon, in Breed, V.J., and Roat, E., eds., Geology of the Grand Canyon: Flagstaff, AZ., Museum of Natural History, p. 82-115.
Huntoon, P.V., 1977, Holocene faulting in the western Grand Canyon, Arizona: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v, 88, p. 1619-1622.
Huntoon, P.V., Billingsley, G.H., Jr., and Clark, M.D., 1981, Geologic map of the Hurricane fault zone and vicinity, western Grand Canyon, Arizona: Grand Canyon, AZ., Grand Canyon Natural History Association, scale 1:48,000.
Hutchinson, D.R., Taylor, D.J., and Zihlman, F.N., 1990, U.S. Geological Survey multichannel seismic data National Energy Research Seismic Library NERSL CD-ROM 1: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-699, 15 p.
Hutchinson, .., 1976, Introduction to COGEODATA symposium: Computers and Geosciences, v. 2, p. 275-277.
Ijirigho, B.T., 1977, Pennsylvanian subsurface stratigraphy of the Black Mesa basin and Four Corners area in northeastern Arizona: unpublished M.S. thesis, University of Arizona, 62 p.
Independent Petroleum Association of America, 1986, United States petroleum statistics 1986 final: Washington, D.C., IPAA.
Irwin, J.H., Stevens, P.R., and Cooley, M.E., 1971, Geology of the Paleozoic rocks, Navajo and Hopi Indian Reservations, Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 521-C, 32 p.
Ishizuka, M., 1984, Japanese work in expert systems: Expert Systems, v. 1, n. 1, July, p. 51-56.
Jachens, R.C., Simpson, R.V., Blakely, R.J., and Saltus, R.V., 1985, Isostatic residual gravity map of the United States: National Oceanic and Atmospherics Administration, in cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Geological Survey Geophysical Investigations Map GP 954-A, scale 1:2,500,000.
71

Jackson, M.J., and Mason, D.C., 1986, The development of integrated geo-information systems: International Journal of Remote Sensing, v. 7, p. 723-740.
Jackson, P., 1986, Introduction to expert systems: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 246 p.
Jackson, R.L., 1952, Stratigraphic relationships of the Supai Formation of central Arizona: Flagstaff, AZ., Museum of Northern Arizona, Plateau, v. 24, p. 84-91.
James, H.L., editor, 1973, Guidebook of Monument Valley and vicinity, Arizona and Utah: New Mexico Geological Society.
Jason Associates Corporation, 1988, Contaminant modeling using neural networks: Englewood, CO., unpublished article, Jason Associates Corporation for The Rocky Mountain Arsenal [Denver, CO.], November, 1988, 11 p.
Johnson, R.R., 1976, Elementary statistics, 2nd Ed.: North Scituate, MA., Duxbury Press, 550 p.
Johnson, S.J., 1989, NEXPERT will support OS/2, Unix stations: InfoWorld, v. 11, n. 35, Aug. 28, 1989.
Johnston, I.M., 1975, A detailed Stratigraphic and environmental analysis of the San Rafael Group (Jurassic) between Black Mesa, Arizona, and the southern Kaiparowitz Plateau, Utah: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Arizona, 510 p.
Jones, R.W., 1975, A quantitative geologic approach to prediction of petroleum resources, in Haun, J.D., ed., Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology No. 1, p. 186-195.
Joshi, A., editor, 1985, Proceedings of the ninth international joint conference on artificial intelligence: Los Altos, CA., Morgan Kaufman Publishers, Inc., ISCAI 85, volumes 1 and 2, conference proceedings of 18-23 Auguest, 1985, Los Angeles, CA., cosponsored by American Association for Artificial Intelligence, 1,309 p.
Kahn, G., and McDermott, J., MUD, a drilling fluids consultant: Pittsburgh, PA., Carnegie-Mellon University, Department of Computer Science, Technical Report.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., and Tversky, A., editors, 1982, Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: New York, NY., Cambridge University Press, 555 p.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A., 1982, The psychology of preference: Scientific American, v. 246, p. 160-173.
Kaplan, S.J., 1984, The industrialization of artificial intelligence:
72

AI Magazine, v. 5, n. 2, summer, p. 51.
Karlstrom, T.N.V., Swann, G.A., and Eastwood, R.L., editors, 1974, Geology of northern Arizona: Geological Society of America, Rocky Mountain Section, 27th Field Conference guidebook, parts I and II, 805 p.
Kash, D.E., and Rycroft, R.V., 1984, Uncertain Alternatives: Oil, natural gas, coal, in U.S. Energy policy - Crisis and complacency: Norman, OK., University of Oklahoma Press, p. 109-136.
Kashfi, M.S., 1983, Upper Devonian source and reservoir rocks in the Black Mesa basin, northeastern Arizona: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 81, n. 50, p. 151-159.
Kaufman, G.M., 1963, Statistical decision and related techniques in oil and gas exploration: Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 307 p.
Kaufman, G.M., 1965, Statistical analysis of the size distribution of oil and gas fields: Society of Petroleum Engineers of A.I.M.E., Symposium on petroleum economics and evaluation, p. 109-124.
Kaufman, G.M., 1975, Models and methods for estimating undiscovered oil and gas What they do and do not do, in Grenon, M., ed., First IIASA Conference on Energy Resources: Laxenburg, Austria, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, p. 237-249.
Kaufman, G.M., 1983, Oil and gas Estimation of undiscovered resources, in Adelman, Houghton, Kaufman, and Zimmerman, eds., Energy resources in an uncertain future: xxxxxxxxxx,xxx., Ballinger, xxx p.
Kearney, M., 1990, Making knowledge engineering productive: AI Expert, v. 5, n. 7, p. 46-51.
Kearns, J.T., 1988, The principles of deductive logic: Albany, NY., The State University of New York Press, 471 p.
Keith, S.B., and Vilt, J.C., 1986, Laramide orogeny in Arizona and adjacent regions: A strato-tectonic synthesis, in Beatty, B., and Vilkinson, P.A.K., eds., Frontiers in geology and ore deposits of Arizona and the Southwest: Arizona Geological Society Digest, v. XVI, p. 502-554.
Keller, G.R., Braile, L.V., and Morgan, P., 1979, Crustal structure, geophysical models and contemporary tectonics of the Colorado Plateau: Tectonophysics, v. 61, p. 131-147.
Kelley, V.C., 1955a, Regional tectonics of the Colorado Plateau and relationships to the origin and distribution of uranium: New Mexico University, Geologic Publication No. 5, 120 p.
Kelley, V.C., 1955b, Monoclines of the Colorado Plateau: Geological
73

Society of America Bulletin, v. 66, p. 789-803.
Kelley, V.C., 1967, Tectonics of the Zuni-Defiance region, New Mexico and Arizona, in Trauger, F.D., ed., Defiance-Zuni-Mt. Taylor region guidebook: New Mexico Geological Society, 18th Field Conference, p. 28-31.
Kelley, V.C., and Clinton, N.J., 1960, Fracture systems and tectonic elements of the Colorado Plateau: University of New Mexico Publications in Geology, No. 6, 104 p.
Kent, W.N., 1975, Facies analysis of the Mississippian Redwall Limestone in the Black Mesa region: unpublished M.S. thesis, Northern Arizona University, 186 p.
Kent, W.N., and Rawson, R.R., 1976, Oil and gas possibilities, Redwall Limestone, Black Mesa basin, Arizona (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 60, p. 1401.
Kernodle, J.M., Levings, G.W., Craigg, S.D., and Dam, W.L., 1989, Hydrogeology of the Gallup Sandstone in the San Juan structural basin, New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, and Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Hydrologic Investigations Atlas HA-720-H, 2 sheets, scales 1:1,000,000.
Kerr, R.A., 1989, Oil and gas estimates plummet: Science, v. 245, September 22nd.
Ketelsen, J.L., Chairman, 1987, Factors affecting U.S. oil and gas outlook: A report of the National Petroleum Council: Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Energy, February, 1987, 179 p., excluding 6 appendices.
Kiersch, G.A., 1956, Metalliferous minerals and mineral fuels: Tucson, AZ., The University of Arizona Press, Mineral resources of the Navajo-Hopi Indian Reservations, Arizona-Utah, vol. 1, 75 p.
King, P.B., 1969, The tectonic map of North America: U.S. Geological Survey, scale 1:5,000,000.
King, P.B., 1977, The evolution of North America (revised edition): Princeton, NJ., Princeton University Press, 197 p.
Kingston, D.R., Dishroon, C.P., and Williams, P.A., 1983a, Global basin classification system: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 67, n. 12, p. 2175-2193.
Kingston, D.R., Dishroon, C.P., and Williams, P.A., 1983b, Hydrocarbon plays and global basin classification: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 67, n. 12, p. 2194-2198.
Kirkland, P.L., 1963, Permian stratigraphy and stratigraphic paleontology of a part of the Colorado Plateau, in Bass, R.O., ed., Shelf carbonates of the Paradox Basin - A symposium: Four Corners
74

Geological Society, 4th Field Conference, p. 80-100.
Klemme, H.D., 1971, What giants and their basins have in common: Oil and Gas Journal, March 1st, p. 85-90; March 8th, p. 103-110; and, March 15th, p. 96-100.
Klemme, H.D., 1975, Giant oil fields related to their geologic setting A possible guide to exploration: Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology, v. 23, p. 30-66.
Klemme, H.D., 1980, Petroleum basins Classifications and characteristics: Journal of Petroleum Geology, v. 3, n. 2, p. 187-207.
Klemme, H.D., 1983, Field size distribution related to basin characteristics: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 81, n. 52, p. 168-176.
Klemme, H.D., 1986, Field size distribution related to basin characteristics, in Rice, D.D., ed., Oil and gas assessment - Methods and applications: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology #21, p.85-99.
Klimasauskas, C.C., 1991, Applying neural networks, part 2: A walk through the application process: PC AI: Intelligent Solutions for Desktop Computers, v. 5, n. 2, March/April, p. 27-34.
Kluth, C.F., and Coney, P.J., 1981, Plate tectonics of the ancestral Rocky Mountains: Geology, v. 9, p. 10-15.
Koch, G.S., Jr., and Link, R.F., 1970 and 1971, Statistical analysis of geological data: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons Publishers, v. 1, 375 p. and v. 2, 438 p.
Koester, E.A., and Conley, J.N., 1973, Wells drilled for hydrocarbon, helium, and geothermal resources: stratigraphic information and selected wells drilled for water in Mohave County, Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, well location map #6, scale 1:500,000.
Koons, E.D., 1945, Geology of the Uinkaret Plateau, northern Arizona: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 56, p. 151-180.
Koons, E.D., 1948, Geology of the eastern Hualapai Reservation: Flagstaff, AZ., Museum of Northern Arizona, Plateau, v. 20, n. 4, p. 53-60.
Koons, E.D., 1964, Structure of the eastern Hualapai Indian Reservation, in Arizona Geological Society Digest, v. VII, p. 97-114.
Kork, J.O., 1981, FENCE, a computer program to create files of borehole data and to construct fence sections of boreholes interactively: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-0183, 62 p.
Kornfeld, J.A., 1963, New Devonian strike sparks northeast Arizona oil play: World Oil, v. 157, n. 1, p. 109-116.
75

Kottlowski, F.E., and Havener, K.C., 1962, Pennsylvanian rocks of the Mogollon Rim area, Arizona, in Weber, R.H., and Peirce, H.V., eds., Guidebook of the Mogollon Rim region: New Mexico Geological Society 13th Field Conference, p. 77-83.
Kotz, S., and Stroup, D.F., 1983, Educated guessing How to cope in an uncertain world: New York, NY., Marcel Dekker, Inc., 187 p.
Knowles, R.S., 1980, America's energy famine: Its cause and cure: Norman, OK., University of Oklahoma Press, 351 p.
Krystinik, K., and Clifton, H.E., 1985, Expert system for computer interpretation of beach and nearshore facies (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 69, p. 276.
Kron, A., and Stix, J., 1982, Geothermal gradient map of the United States: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Geophysical Data Center, for Los Alamos National Laboratory, University of California, scale 1:2,500,000.
Kudryashova, N.M., and Starik-Bludov, M.S., 1940, Volume genetic-method of calculating oil reserves: Razvedka Nedr., n. 4.
Kuhn, P.J., compiler, 1958, Oil and gas in the Four Corners: Amarillo, TX., National Petroleum Bibliography, 298 p.
Kunkel, R.P., 1965, History of exploration for oil and natural gas in the Kaiparowits region, Utah, in Goode, H.D., and Robison, R.A., eds., Guidebook to the geology of Utah, No. 19: Utah Geological Society and Intermountain Association of Petroleum Geologists, distributed by Utah Geological and Mineralogical Survey, p. 93-111.
Lake, L.W., and Carroll, H.B., Jr., editors, 1986, Reservoir characterization: New York, NY., Academic Press, Inc., 659.
Lambert, I.B., 1989, Precambrian sedimentary sequences and their mineral and energy resources, in Price, R.A., ed., Origin and evolution of sedimentary basins and their energy and mineral resources: International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics and American Geophysical Union, Geophysical Monograph 48, IUGG Vol. 3, p. 169-173.
Landes, K.K., 1970, Petroleum geology of the United States: New York, NY., Viley Interscience Publishers, Inc., 571 p.
Langenkamp, R.D., 1980, The illustrated petroleum reference dictionary: Tulsa, OK., PennWell Publishing Company, 530 p.
Langston, J.D., 1976, A new look at the U.S. Oil and and gas potential, in Cameron, V.S., ed., Exploration and economics of the petroleum industry, v. 14: New York, NY., Mathew Bender Publishers, p. 33-50.
Lapedes, D.N., editor, 1978, McGraw-Hill encyclopedia of the geological sciences: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Book Company, 915 p.
76

Lee, P.J., and Wang, P.C.C., 1982, Analysis of pool size distributions for evaluations of petroleum resources: unpublished U.S. Geological Survey Symposium notes, Oil and gas resource appraisal methodology for the future, May 17-19, 1983, Denver, CO., Geological Survey of Canada sponsored.
Lee, P.J., and Wang, P.C.C., 1983a, Probabilistic formulation of a method for the evaluation of petroleum resources: Journal of the International Association for Mathematical Geology, v. 15, n. 1, p. 163181.
Lee, P.J., and Wang, P.C.C., 1983b, Conditional analysis for petroleum resource evaluation: Journal of the International Association for Mathematical Geology, v. 15, n 2, p. 349-361.
Lenat, D.B., Sutherland, W.R., and Gibbons, J., 1982, Heuristic search for new microcircuit structures: An application of artificial intelligence: AI Magazine, summer, p. 17-33.
Leonard, J.E., and Fried, C.C., 1989, Petroleum problem sets challenge for Geographic Information Systems: Geobyte, August, p. 46-50.
Leonard, J.E., Fried, C.C., and Milam, K., 1989, Operation database Petroleum CIS results: Geobyte, December, v. 4, n. 6, p. 26-48.
Lerche, I., 1990, Basin analysis - Quantitative methods, volume I: New York, NY., Academic Press, Inc., 562 p.
Lerche, I., 1990, Basin Analysis - Quantitative methods, volume II: New York, NY., Academic Press, Inc., 570 p.
Lessentine, R.H., 1965, Kaiparowits and Black Mesa basins: Stratigraphic synthesis: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 49, p. 1997-2019.
Levorsen, A.I., 1967, Geology of petroleum, 2nd Ed.: San Francisco, CA., W.H. Freeman and Company, 724 p.
Lewis, C.J., 1984, Are our oil and gas resource assessments realistic? (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 68, p. 500.
Lewis, C.J., 1986, Are our oil and gas resource estimates realistic?, in Rice, D.D., ed., Oil and gas assessment Methods and applications: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology No. 21, p. 195-202.
Lightwave Consultants, 1985, ESIE - The Expert System Inference Engine knowledge engineer's manual: Tampa, FL., 26 p. [computer software program, copyrighted].
Lijmback, G.W.M., 1975, On the origin of petroleum: London, England, Proceedings of the 9th World Petroleum Congress, vol. 2, Applied
77

Science Publishers, p. 357-369.
Linden, H.R., 1973, New policies could stimulate gas production but U.S. gas requirements may not be met: Institute of Gas Technology, reprinted from Pipeline and Gas Journal, 6 p.
Linden, H.R., 1975, Fossil fuel resources: Where do we stand? Pipeline and Gas Journal, v. 202, n. 12, p. 60-62, 64-65.
Linstone, H.A., and Turoff, M., editors, 1975, The Delphi method: techniques and applications: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 620 p.
Lipman, P.W., 1980, Cenozoic volcanism in the Western United States: Implications for continental tectonics, in Continental tectonics: National Academy of Sciences, Studies in Geophysics, p. 161-174.
Lisker, P., 1989, Neuron Data goes global with Sony pact: Management Information Systems Week, v. 10, n. 30, July 31, 1989.
Lochman-Balk, C., 1971, The Cambrian of the craton of the United States, in Holland, C.H., ed., Cambrian of the new world: New York, NY., Wiley-Interscience Publishing Company, 456 p.
Longwell, C.R., Miser, H.D., Moore, R.C., Bryan, K., and Paige, S., 1923, Rock formations in the Colorado Plateau of southern Utah and northern Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 132-A, p. 1-23.
Lovejoy, E.M.P., 1973, Major early Cenozoic deformation along Hurricane Fault zone, Utah and Arizona: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 57, p. 510-519.
Lovejoy, W.F., and Homan, P.T., 1965, Methods of estimating reserves of crude oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids: Baltimore, MD., John Hopkins Press, Resources for the Future, Inc., 163 p.
Lowell, J.D., 1985, Structural styles in petroleum exploration: Tulsa, OK., OGCI Publications (Oil and Gas Consultants International, Inc., 460 p.
Lucchitta, I., 1974, Structural evolution of northwest Arizona and its relation to adjacent Basin and Range Province structures, in Karlstrom, T.N.V., and others, eds., Geology of northern Arizona, Part I - Regional Studies: Geological Society of American, Rocky Mountain Section Meeting, Flagstaff, AZ., p. 336-354.
Lucchitta, I., and Young, R.A., 1986, Structure and geomorphic character of western Colorado Plateau in the Grand Canyon-Lake Mead region, in Nations, J.D., and others, eds., Geology of central and northern Arizona: Geological Society of America Field Trip Guidebook, Northern Arizona University, p. 159-176.
Luedke, R.G., and Smith, R.L., 1978, Map showing distribution, composi-
78

tion, and age of Late Cenozoic volcanic centers in Arizona and New Mexico: U.S. Geological Survey, Miscellaneous Investigations Series Map I-1091-A, scale 1:1,000,000.
Lund, P.H., 1945, Oil and gas prospects in Arizona: Oil Weekly, v. 117, n. 2, p. 54-56.
Luttrell, G.W., Hubert, M.L., and Murdock, C.R., 1988, Geologic names of the United States through 1986 in the GEONAMES data base: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 88-44, 10 p.
Lysonski, J.C., Sumner, J.S., Aiken, C.L.V., and Schmidt, J.S., 1980, Residual Bouguer gravity anomally map of Arizona: University of Arizona, Department of Geosciences, IGSN 71, scale 1:1,000,000.
Lyth, A.L., Jr., 1971, Summary of possible future petroleum potential, region 3, western Rocky Mountains, in Cram, I.H., Future petroleum provinces of the United States - Their geology and potential: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 15, v. 1, p. 406-412.
MacDonald, R., 1990, Parallel processing for the earth sciences: Part 1 - Introduction: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Developments, v. 7, issue 1, p. 6-8.
Mackay, I.H., and North, F.K., 1975, Undiscovered oil reserves, in Haun, J.D., ed., Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Studies in Geology No. 1, p. 76-86.
Maggio, R.C., 1988, The role of the Geographic Information System in the expert system: The Compiler, v. 6, n. 1, p. 23-27.
Magoon, L.B., 1987, The petroleum system A classification scheme for research, resource assessment and exploration (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 71, p. 587.
Magoon, L.B., 1988a, The petroleum system A classification scheme for research and resource assessment, in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources 1988 program and abstracts: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1025, p. 29-31.
Magoon, L.B., editor, 1988b, Petroleum systems of the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1870, 68 p.
Magoon, L.B., editor, 1992, The Petroleum system Status of research and methods, 1992: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 2007, 98 p.
Magoon, L.B., and Dow, .G., 1991, The petroleum system From source to trap (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 75, n. 3, p. 627.
Mallory, W.W., editor, 1972, Geologic atlas of the Rocky Mountain region: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists, 331 p.
79

Mankin, C.J., Chairman, 1991, Undiscovered oil and gas resources - An evaluation of the Department of the Interior's 1989 assessment procedures: Washington, D.C., National Research Council, National Academy Press, 179 p.
Marble, D.F., Calkins, H.V., and Peuquet, D.J., 1984, Basic readings in Geographic Information Systems: Villiamsville, NY., SPAD Systems, Ltd.
Marland, G., 1978, A random drilling model for placing limits on ultimately recoverable crude oil in the conterminous U.S.: Materials and Society, v. 2, Pergamon Press, Ltd., p. 5-14.
Martin, J., 1988, Neurocomputers that learn: Computer Science, January, p. 50-56.
Maslyn, R.M., 1986, EXPLOR and PROSPECTOR Expert systems for oil and gas and mineral exploration, in Hanley, J.T., and Merriam, D.F., eds., Microcomputer applications in geology: Computers and Geology Series, p. 89-103.
Mast, R.F., 1978, U.S. Geological Survey oil and gas resource investigations program: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 78-303, 79 P-
Mast, R.F., 1982, U.S. petroleum exploration Likely targets 1980-2000, in Perspectives in geology: Illinois State Geological Survey Circular 525, p. 13-18.
Mast, R.F., Dolton, R.A., Crovelli, Powers, R.B., Charpentier, R.R., Root, D.H., and Attanasi, E.D., 1988, Estimates of undiscovered recoverable oil and gas resources for the onshore and state offshore areas of the United States (abst.), in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources 1988: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1025, 31-32.
Mast, R.F., Dolton, G.L., Crovelli, R.A., Root, D.H., and Attanasi, E.D., 1989, Estimates of undiscovered conventional oil and gas resources in the United States A part of the Nation's energy endowment: U.S. Geological Survey and Minerals Management Service, 44 p.
Mast, R.F., Lantz, R.J., Kahler, R.A., and Lore, G.L., 1979, Appraisal of frontier offshore U.S. undiscovered oil and gas resources, in United States Geological Survey Yearbook, Fiscal Year 1979: U.S. Geological Survey, p. 14-22.
Mast, R.F., McMullin, R.H., Bird, K.J., and Brosge, V.P., 1980, Resource appraisal of undiscovered oil and gas resources in the William 0. Douglas Arctic Wildlife Range: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 80-916, 62 p.
Mast, R.F., and 9 others, 1989, Estimates of undiscovered conventional oil and gas resources in the United States A part of the Nation's
80

energy endowment: U.S. Geological Survey, (unspecified publication type), 44 p.
Masters, C.D., 1979, Recent estimates of U.S. oil and gas resource potential: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 79-236, 19 p.
Masters, C.D., Root, D.H., and Attanasi, E.D., 1991, Resource Constraints in petroleum production potential: Science, July 12, v. 253, p. 146-152.
Masters, C.D., Root, D.H., and Dietzman, .D., 1983, Distribuition and qualitative assessment of world crude-oil reserves and resources: U.S. Geological Survey, Open-File Report 83-728, 23 p.
Materna, T., 1987, Neural networks enter high speed marketplace: Computer Technology Review, v. VII, n. 7, June, 4 p.
Matheny, M.L., 1964, A history of the petroleum industry in the Four Corners area, in Durango-Silverton guidebook, 14th Annual Convention: Four Corners Geological Society, p. 39-53.
Matheny, M.L., and Ulrich, R.A., 1983, A history of the petroleum industry in the Four Corners area, in Fassett, J.E., ed., Oil and gas fields of the Four Corners area, vol. Ill: Four Corners Geological Society, p. 804-831.
Mayer, L., 1979, Evolution of the Mogollon Rim in central Arizona: Tectonophysics, v. 61, p. 49-62.
McCammon, R.B., 1980, Research on uranium resource models, a progress report, Part II: Geologic decision analysis and its applications to genetic-geologic models: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 80-2018, 157 p. with parts I, II, and III.
McCammon, R.B., 1982, Computer capability expanding: Geotimes, v. 27, n. 5, May, p. 18-19.
McCammon, R.B., 1983, Operation manual for the muPROSPECTOR consultant system: U.S. Geological Survey, Open-File Report 83-804, 29 p.
McCammon, R.B., 1984, Recent developments in Prospector and future expert systems in regional resource evaluation, in Proceedings of the Ninth Pecora Memorial Symposium on Remote Sensing, Piscataway, NJ.: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Service Center, p. 243-248.
McCammon, R.B., 1990, PROSPECTOR III: Towards a map-based expert system for regional mineral resource assessment, in Agterberg, P.P., and Bonham-Carter, G.F., eds., Statistical applications in the Earth sciences: Geological Survey of Canada Paper 89-9, Proceedings of a colloquim, Ottawa, Ontario, Nov. 14-18, 1988, p. 395404.
McCammon, R.B., and Agterberg, P.P., 1982, Computers seeking minerals:
81

Geotimes, v. 27, n. 1, January, p. 14-16.
McCammon, R.B., Botbol, J.M., Clark, A.L., Sinding-Larsen, R., and Olson, A.C., 1978, International Geological Correlation Program Project 98: COGEODATA workshop on computer applications in mineral resource problems: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 780865, 77 p.
McCammon, R.B., Boudette, E.L., Cameron, C.C., Cox, L.J., and Moench, R.H., 1984, An expert system for mineral resource assessment in the Sherbrooke-Lewiston 1 x 2 quadranges, Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-751, 37 p.
McCaslin, J.C., 1976, Wildcat series due Arizona: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 74, n. 7, Feb. 16th, p. 101-102.
McCaslin, J.C., 1980a, Arizona hosts deep overthrust wildcat: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 78, p. 113.
McCaslin, J.c., 1980b, Arizona's stratigraphic trap potential eyed: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 78, n. 11, p. 205.
McClelland, J.L., and Rumelhart, D.E., 1988, Explorations in parallel distributed processing - A handbook of models, programs, and exercises: Cambridge, MA., The MIT Press, A Bradford Book, 344 p.
McCloy, M., 1986, Oil glut ^last hurrah' Major shortage forecast by 1990s: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Explorer, June, v. 7, n. 6, p. 24-25.
McCulloh, T.H., 1973, Oil and gas, in Brobst, D.A., and Pratt, W.P., eds., United States mineral resources: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 820, p. 477-496.
McDermott, J., 1983, Extracting knowledge from expert systems, in Proceedings of the International Joint Conference of Artificial Intelligence, Karlsruhe, West Germany, August, p. 100-107.
McDowell, A.N., 1975, What are the problems in estimating the oil potential of a basin: Oil and Gas Journal, June 9th, p. 85-90.
McGlohlin, W.H., 1956, Stability of choices among uncertain alternatives: American Journal of Psychology, v. 69, p. 604-615.
McGetchin, T.R., Burke, K., Thompson, G., and Young, R., 1979, Plateau uplifts, mode and mechanisms: EOS Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, v. 60, n. 6, p. 64-67.
McGookey, D.P., 1972, Cretaceous System, in Mallory, W.W., ed., Geologic atlas of the Rocky Mountain region: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists, p. 190-228.
McGoon, D.O., Jr., 1962, Occurrences of Paleozoic carbonaceous deposits in the Mogollon Rim region, in Weber, R.W., and Peirce, H.W., eds.,
82

Guidebook of the Mogollon Rim region east-central Arizona: New Mexico Geological Society, 13th Field Conference, p. 89-91.
McKee, E.D., 1951, Sedimentary basins of Arizona and surrounding areas: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 62, p. 481-506.
McKee, E.D., 1979, Arizona, in Craig, L.C., and Connor, C.W., coordinators, Paleotectonic investigations of the Mississippian System in the United States, pt. 1: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1010-L, p. 198-207.
McKee, E.D., 1982, The Supai Group of Grand Canyon: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1173, 504 p.
McKee, E.D., and Breed, W.J., 1969, The Toroweap Formation and Kaibab Limestone, in Summers, W.K., and Kottlowski, F.E., eds., The San Andres Limestone, a reservoir for oil and water in New Mexico: New Mexico Geological Society Special Paper no. 3, p. 12-26.
McKee, E.D., Crosby, E.J., and others, editors, 1975, Paleotectonic investigations of the Pennsylvanian System in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 853, 541 p. and dozens of plates.
McKee, E.D., and Gutschick, R.C., 1969, History of the Redwall Limestone of northern Arizona: Geological Society of America Memoir 114, 726 p.
McKee, E.D., and McKee, E.H., 1972, Pliocene uplift of the Grand Canyon region Time of drainage adjustments: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 83, p. 1923-1932.
McKee, E.D., Oriel, S.S., and others, editors, 1967, Paleotectonic investigations of the Permian System in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 515, 271 p. and lots of plates.
McKee, E.H., Gomez, P.M., and Hibpshman, M.H., 1977, Status of mineral resource information for the Hualapai Indian Reservation, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey, Bureau of Indian Affairs Administrative Report BIA-31, 38 p.
McKelvey, V.E., 1972, Mineral resource estimates and public policy: American Scientist, v. 60, p. 32-40.
McKelvey, V.E., 1973, Mineral resource estimates and public policy, in Brobst, D.A., and Pratt, W.P., editors, United States mineral resources: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 820, p. 9-19.
McKelvey, V.E., and Duncan, D.C., 1965, United States and world resources of energy, in Symposium on Fuel and Energy Economics, Joint with Division on Chemical, Marketing and Economics: American Chemical Society, 149th National Meeting, Division of Fuel
83

Chemistry, v. 9, n. 2, p. 1-17.
McKenny, J.W., and Masters, J.A., 1968, Dineh-bi-Keyah Field, Apache County, Arizona: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 52, p. 2045-2057.
McKenny, J.W., and Masters, J.A., 1970, Limestone likely source of oil in igneous sill: World Oil, v. 170, n. 1, p. 57-60.
McKeown, D.M., Harvey, W.A., and McDermott, J., 1985, Rule-based interpretation of aerial imagery: Ne York, NY., Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, v. 7, n. 5, September, p. 570-585.
McLean, J.G., 1972, The United States energy outlook and its implications for national policy: Stamford, CT., Continental Oil Company, 12 p.
Megill, R.E., 1971, An introduction to exploration economics: Tulsa, OK., The Petroleum Publishing Company, 159 p.
Megill, R.E., 1977, An introduction to risk analysis: Tulsa, OK., The Petroleum Publishing Company, 199 p.
Megill, R.E., 1984, Exploration outlook: Is the past a key to the future?: World Oil, v. 198, n. 7, June, p. 159-168.
Meisner, J., and Demirmen, F., 1981, The creaming method A Bayesian procedure to forecast future oil and gas discoveries in mature exploration provinces: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, v. 144, n. 1, p. 1-31.
Meltzer, B., and Michie, D., editors, 1969, Machine intelligence - 4: New York, NY., American Elsevier Publishing Company, Inc., 508 p.
Menard, H.W., 1981, Toward a rational strategy for oil exploration: Scientific American, v. 244, n. 1, p. 55-65.
Menard, H.W., and Sharman, G., 1975, Scientific uses of random drilling models: Science, v. 190, n. 4212, p. 337-343.
Mendenhall, W., 1975, Introduction to probability and statistics: North Scituate, MA., Duxbury Publishers, 460 p.
Meyer, R.F., editor, 1981, Long-term energy resources, vol. I: United Nations Institute for Training and Research, Proceedings of an International Conference, Nov. 26-Dec. 7, 1979, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, published by Pitman Publishers, Inc., Marshfield, MA.
Meyer, R.F., Wynn, J.C., and Olson, J.C., editors, 1984, The future of heavy crude and tar sands: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill, Inc., United Nations Institute for Training and Research, Second International Conference, Feb. 7-17, 1982, Caracas, Venezuela, 1,338 p.
Meyer, S.L., 1975, Data analysis for scientists and engineers: New York,
84

New York, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 513 p.
Meyerhoff, A.A., 1976, Economic impact and geopolitical implications of giant petroleum fields: American Scientist, v. 64, Sept.-Oct., 1976, p. 536-541.
Mial, A.D., editor, 1980, Facts and principles of world petroleum occurrence: Calgary, Canada, Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 6, 1,003 p.
Miall, A.D., 1984, Principles of sedimentary basin analysis: New York, NY., Springer-Verlag, Inc., 490 p.
Michalski, R.S., Carbonell, J.G., and Mitchell, T.M., 1983, Machine learning: Palo Alto, CA., Tioga Publishing Company.
Michalski, R.S., Carbonell, J.G., and Mitchell, T.M., 1986, Machine learning, volume 2: Los Altos, CA., Kaufmann Publishing Company.
Michie, D., editor, 1979, Expert systems in the micro-electronic age: Edinburgh, Scotland, Edinburgh University Press, 287 p.
Michie, D., editor, 1982, Introductory readings in expert systems: New York, NY., Gordon and Breach Publishers, 237 p.
Middleton, M.F., 1982, Tectonic history from vitrinite reflectance: Geophysical Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, v. 68, p. 121-132.
Middlewood, M., 1991, BRAINMAKER: Getting started with BRAINMAKER PROFESSIONAL V. 2.0 (review): PC AI Intelligent solutions for desktop computers, v. 5, n. 2, March/April, p. 50-51, 60-61.
Miller, B.M., 1981, Methods of estimating potential hydrocarbon resources by the U.S. Geological Survey: Case studies in resource assessment in the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska and the William 0. Douglas Arctic Wildlife Range, in Exploration and economics of the petroleum industry: New York, NY., Matthew Bender and Company, v. 19, p. 57-96.
Miller, B.M., 1982, Application of exploration play analysis techniques to the assessment of conventional petroleum resources by the USGS: Journal of Petroleum Technology, v. 34, n. 1, p. 55-64.
Miller, B.M., editor, 1983, Petroleum potential of wilderness lands in the Western United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 902, 200 p.
Miller, B.M., 1986a, Building an expert system helps classify sedimentary basins and assess petroleum resources: Geobyte, spring 1986, p. 44-50.
Miller, B.M., 1986b, Resource appraisal methods, in Rice, D.D., ed., Oil and gas assessment Methods and applications: American Associ-
85

ation of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology #21, p. 1-23.
Miller, B.M., 1988, Three-dimensional analysis of sedimentary basins, in U.S. Geological Survey, The Cross Section, Dec. 1988, p. 4-5. [Note: this reference is not citable in a published article].
Miller, B.M., 1989, Application of Geographic Information System to exploration studies in sedimentary basins (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 73, p. 1035-1036.
Miller, B.M., 1990, An object-oriented expert system for sedimentary basin analysis with applications in petroleum geology (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 74, n. 5, p. 719.
Miller, B.M., 1990, Applications of Geographic Information System (CIS) to exploration studies in the San Juan basin, New Mexico (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 74, n. 5, p. 719.
Miller, B.M., Latzke, P.O., and Schachte, B.R., 1990, Videocassette demonstrating the applications of geographic information systems techniques to basin characterization Case study for the San Juan basin, New Mexico: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-275-A text, 5 p., and 90-275-B, videocassette.
Miller, B.M., and 8 others, 1975, Geologic estimates of undiscovered recoverable oil and gas resources in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 725, 78 p.
Milling, M.E., Jackson, M.P.A., Kerans, C., and Schultz-Ela, D.D., 1991, Advanced geoscience technology can optimize hydrocarbon exploration and recovery efficiency: Geotimes, v. 36, n. 3, p. 20-22.
Minasi, M., 1990a, Exhibiting uncertainty (pt. 2): AI Expert, v. 5, n. 7, p. 13, 15.
Minasi, M., 1990b, Working with inference engines: AI Expert, v. 5, n. 9, p. 15-17.
Modelevsky, M.S., and Pominov, V.F., 1975, Classification of petroleum resources and reserves in the U.S.S.R. and its comparison with classification used in other countries, in Grenon, M., ed., First IIASA Conference on Energy Resources: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, p. 121-127.
Molenaar, C.M., 1969, Lexicon of stratigraphic names used in northern Arizona and southern Utah east of the Paleozoic hingeline, in Baars, D.L., ed., Geology and natural history of the Grand Canyon region: Four Corners Geological Society, 5th Field Conference, p. 69-77.
Moninger, B., 1989, Artificial intelligence for data management: AI Applications, v. 3, n. 4, p. 47-48.
86

Monmonier, M.S., 1982, Computer-assisted cartography: Principles and prospects: Englevood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 214 p.
Moody, J.D., 1970, Petroleum demands of future decades: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 54, p. 2239-2245.
Moody, J.D., and Geiger, R.E., 1975, Petroleum resources: How much oil and where?: Technology Review, March/April, p. 39-45.
Moody, J.D., Mooney, J.W., and Spivak, J., 1970, Giant oil fields of North America, in Halbouty, M.T., ed., Geology of giant petroleum fields: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 14, p. 8-17.
Moore, C.L., 1962, Method for evaluating United States crude oil resources and projecting domestic crude oil availability: Washington D.C., U.S. Department of Interior, Office of Oil and Gas report, 112 p.
Moore, C.L., 1966, Projections of U.S. petroleum supply to 1980, with annex titled "The Gompertz curve for analyzing and projecting the historic supply patterns of exhaustible natural resources: Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Oil and Gas, 42 p.
Moore, C.L., 1970, Analysis and projection of historic patterns of U.S. crude oil and natural gas, in Future petroleum provinces of the United States A summary: National Petroleum Council, p. 133-138.
Moore, R.T., 1972, Geology of the Virgin and Beaverdam Mountains, Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology Bulletin 186, 65 p.
Morgan, P., Biswas, G., Kendall, C.G. St.C., Bezdek, J.C., and Anand, T., 1988, MAGIK: A system for hydrocarbon play analysis, in Proceedings of the SPIE (Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers) The International Society for Optical Engineering: Applications of Artificial Intelligence, VI, v. 937, p. 36-43.
Morris, K.P., 1990, The automatic detection of three-dimensional features from remotely-sensed imagery and digital terrain models, in Remote sensing: An operational technology for the mining and petroleum industries: London, England, Institue of Mining and Metallurgy, p. 59-74.
Morris, K.P., 1991, Using knowledge-based rules to map the three-dimensional nature of geological features: Ann Arbor, MI., Environmental Research Institute of Michigan, Proceedings of the Eighth Thematic Conference on Geologic Remote Sensing, Volume II, Denver, CO., p. 989-1002.
Morrison, J.L., 1989, CIS: A United States government agency perspective, in Proceedings - National conference: Challenge for the
87

1990s, CIS, Geographic Information Systems: Ottawa, Canada, Institute of Surveying and Mapping, p. 410-414.
Morrison, R.B., Menges, C.M., and Lepley, L.K., 1981, Neotectonic maps of Arizona, in Stone, C., and Jenney, J.P., eds., ACS Digest: Arizona Geological Society, v. XIII, p. 179-183.
Morse, B., 1987, Expert interface to a Geographic Information System, in Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Automated Cartography, Baltimore, MD., March, 1987, p. 535-541.
Moulton, F.C., Owings, B.F., and Hansen, A.R., 1978, Utah-Arizona hingeline thrust belt: Potential new petroleum province (abst.): American Association of Petroleu Geologists Bulletin, v. 62, p. 23572358.
Mouradian, W.H., 1990, Knowledge acquisition in a medical domain: AI Explert, v. 5, n. 7, p. 35-38.
Muffler, L.J.P., editor, 1979, Assessment of geothermal resources of the United States - 1978: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 790, prepared in cooperation with the Department of Energy, 163 p.
Murray, G.E., 1965, Indigenous Precambrian petroleum?: American Association of Geologists Bulletin, v. 49, p. 3-21.
Myers, D.A., Sharp, J.A., Murray, D.K., Jones, D.C., and Pearl, R.H., 1977, Energy resources map of Colorado: U.S. Geological Survey map 1-1039, repreinted 1982, scale 1:500,000.
Myrick, D.R., and Shepardson, K.D., 1988, The Geographic Resources Analysis Support System (GRASS) Geographic Information Systems (CIS) and expert systems: Exploring the potentials, in Proceedings of the Geographic Information Systems Awareness Seminar, May 16-19, 1988, Salt Lake City, UT., p. 19-22.
Naeser, N.L., and McCulloh, T.H., editors, 1988, Thermal history of sedimentary basins: Methods and case histories: New York, NY., Springer-Verlag, 319 .
Nalivkin, V.C., and others, 1976, Criteria and methods for the quantitative assessment of oil and gas occurrence in large, poorly studied territories: Sovetskaya Geologiya, n. 1, p. 28-39.
National Petroleum Council, 1952, Petroleum productive capacity: Washington, D.C., National Petroleum Council, 102 p.
National Petroleum Council, 1970, Future petroleum rovinces of the United States: Washington, D.C., National Petroleum Council Committee on Possible Future Petroleum Provinces of the U.S., 138 p.
National Petroleum Council, 1973, U.S. energy outlook Oil and gas availability: Washington, D.C., Committee on U.S. Energy Outlook, 768 p.
88

National Petroleum Council, 1980, Unconventional gas sources: Tight gas reservoirs, v. 5, pt. I, 222 p., and pt. II, 767 p.; executive summary, 32 p.
National Research Council, 1975, Resources of the fossil fuels, in Mineral resources and the environment: Washington, D.C., National Academy of Sciences, Chapter V (United States), p. 79-92.
National Research Council, 1988a, Energy-related research in the U.S. Geological Survey: Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, Committee Advisory to the U.S. Geological Survey, M.E. Ostrom, Chairman, 95 p.
National Research Council, 1988b, Scientific drilling and hydrocarbon resources: Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, Committee on Hydrocarbon Research Drilling, W. L. Fisher, Chairman, 89 p.
Nations, J.D., 1978, The geology of Arizona: Its energy resources and potential: Interstate Oil Compact Commission Committee Bulletin, v. 20, p. 42-53.
Nations, J.D., Doss, A.K., and Ybarra, R.A., 1983a, Geologic setting of oil and gas exploration in Arizona, in Fassett, J.E., ed., Oil and gas fields of the Four Corners area, vol. Ill: Four Corners Geological Society, p. 763-772.
Nations, J.D., Doss, A.K., and Ybarra, R.A., 1983b, Stratigraphy and oil and gas production of Arizona, 1978-1983, in Fassett, J.E., ed., Oil and gas fields of the Four Corners area, vol. Ill: Four Corners Geological Society, p. 832-843.
Nations, J.D., and Eaton, J.G., editors, 1991, Stratigraphy, depositional environments, and sedimentary tectonics of the western margin, Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway: Geological Society of America Special Paper 260, 216 p.
Nations, J.D., and Stump, E., 1981, Geology of Arizona: Dubuque, IA., Kendall-Hunt Publishing Company, 210 p.
Nau, D.S., 1983, Expert computer systems: Computer, v. 16, p. 63-85.
Nehring, R., 1978, Giant oil fields and world oil resources: Santa Monica, CA., The Rand Corporation, Report R-2284-CIA, 162 p.
Nehring, R., and Van Driest, E.R., II, 1981, The discovery of significant oil and gas fields in the United States: The Rand Publication Series R-2654/l-USGS/DOE, 2 volumes, 236 p. and appendix 477 p.
Nelson, K.D., editor, 1988, The COCORP atlas: Ithaca, NY., Cornell University, Institute for the Study of the Continents, v. 1, 8 p.
Neruchev, S.G., 1964, Possibilities of estimating prognostic reserves of oil on a genetic basis: Petroleum Geology, v. 8, n. 7, p. 368-372.
89

Netschert, B.C., 1958, The future supply of oil and gas: Baltimore, MD., The John Hopkins Press, published for Resources for the Future, Inc., Washington, D.C., 134 p.
Neuron Data, 1989, Introduction to NEXPERT OBJECT: Palo Alto, CA., Neuron Data, 123 p.
Newendorp, P.O., 1975, Decision analysis for petroleum exploration: Tulsa, OK., The Petroleum Publishing Company, 668 p.
Newquist, H.P., III, 1992, The state of the AI business: AI Expert Magazine, v. 7, n. 2, Feb., p. 59-61.
Nickerson, B.C., and Freeman, H., 1986, Development of a rule-based system for automatic map generation, in Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, Seattle, A., July, 1986, p. 537-556.
Nilsson, N.J., 1965, Learning machines: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Nilsson, N.J., 1971, Problem-solving methods in artificial intelligence: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Nilsson, J.J., 1980, Principles of artificial intelligence: Palo Alto, CA., Tioga Publishing Company, 476 p.
Nordwall, B.D., 1989, NEXPERT OBJECT at ITT Avionics for an electronic warfare system 'NEXPERT as a visual programming tool': Aviation eek & space Technology, July 17, 1989, p. 83-85.
North, F.K., 1978, In the U.S. and Canada...expanded drilling won't solve the energy dilemma: World Oil, Oct., 1978, p. 133-138.
Nuccio, V.F., and Barker, C.E., editors, Applications of thermal maturity studies to energy exploration: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Rocky Mountain Section, 175 p.
Oetking, P., Chairman, 1967, Southern Rocky Mountain region geological highway map no. 2, Utah-Colorado-Arizona-New Mexico [with tectonic map, geologic history, stratigraphic columns, and cross-sections]: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, scale approximately 1:2,000,000.
Office of the Data Base Administrator, 1979, Scientific and technical, spatial, and bibliographic data bases of the U.S. Geological Survey, 1979: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 817, unpaginated.
Office of the Data Base Administrator, 1983, Scientific and technical, spatial, and bibliographic data bases and systems of the U.S. Geological Survey, 1983: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 817, Revised Edition, 435 p.
90

Office of Policy, Planning, and Analysis, 1983, Energy projections to the year 2010: U.S. Department of Energy Report DOE/PE-0029/2, available from National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, 176 p.
Office of Public Affairs, 1977, Enhanced recovery of oil and gas: U.S. Department of Energy, 18 p.
Office of Research and Development, 1975, Energy research programs of the U.S. Department of the Interior, Fiscal Year 1976.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1964, Crude surplus expected through 1975: Oil and Gas Journal, Feb. 24th, p. 70-71.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1966, An expert gives a geological approach to reserve ultimate: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 64, n. 34, p. 150-151.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1975, Northern Arizona looks for the drill: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 73, Oct. 20th, p. 115, 118.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1976, Exxon says U.S. still has vast potential: Oil and Gas Journal, Mar. 22nd, p. 29.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1977, Petroleum 2000: Oil and Gas Journal, Aug. 1977, v. 75 (75th Anniversary Issue), n. 35, 538 p.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1978, Shell: Alaska holds 58 percent of future U.S. oil finds: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 76, n. 47, p. 214.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1979a, Arizona area offers good potential for new finds, v. 77, n. 44, p. 203-204.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1979b, CIA: Global oil supply outlook poor: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 77, n. 36, p. 50-51.
Oil and Gas Journal, 1980, CIA sees global oil production peaking: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 78, n. 17, p. 50.
Osborne, D.A., 1992, Neural networks provide more accurate reservoir permeability: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 90, n. 39, September 28th, p. 80-83.
O'Sullivan, R.B., 1969, Crude oil, natural gas, and other associated gases, in Mineral and water resources of Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Mines Bulletin 180, p. 70-91.
Owen, E.W., 1975, Trek of the oil finders: A history of exploration for petroleum: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir #6, 1,647 p.
Pai, M., 1988, A knowledge based system approach for hydrocarbon prospect and play analysis: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of South Carolina, 189 p.
91

Pakiser, L.C., and Mooney, W.D., editors, 1989, Geophysical framework of the continental United States: The Geological Society of America Memoir 172, 826 p.
Pallatto, J., 1989, Expert-system shells span DOS, OS/2 nets: PC Week, v. 6, n. 34, Aug. 28, 1989.
Palmer, D.A., unpublished, Neural networks and expert systems: San Diego, CA., Hecht-Nielsen Neurocomputers, Inc., 16 p.
P'an, Chung-Hsiang, 1982, Petroleum in basement rocks: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 66, p. 1597-1643.
Pankonien, L.J., 1985, What's happening in the United States: Over 1.8 million acres leased in central western New Mexico [and Arizona]: World Oil, v. 201, n. 2, p. 19.
Paperback Software, Inc., 1988, VP-EXPERT: Rule-based expert system development tool: Berkeley, CA., user's manual and computer software.
Parent, J.D., and Linden, H.R., 1975, Review of current United States fossil fuel resources: unpublished report, Chicago, IL., Institute of Gas Technology, 15 p.
Parent, J.D., 1982, A survey of United States and total world production, proved reserves, and remaining recoverable resources of fossil fuels and uranium as of December 31, 1980: Chicago, IL., Institute of Gas Technology, 180 p.
Parker, H.D., 1986, Geographic Information Systems technology in natural resource management: The Bureau of Land Management's example, in Opitz, B., ed., Geographic Information Systems in government: Hampton, VA., p. 1-6.
Parker, J.M., Riggs, E.A., and Fisher, W.L., 1977, Oil and gas potential of the San Juan basin, in Fassett, J.E., ed., San Juan basin III: New Mexico Geological Society, 28th Field Conference, p. 227-234.
Patten, C., 1985, Knowledge engineering: Tapping the experts: Electronic Design, v. 33, v. 10, May, p. 93-98, 100.
Pawlewicz, M., and Palacas, J.G., 1992, Petrography and Rock-Eval studies of organic matter in Precambrian rocks, U.S.A. and U.S.S.R. (abst.), in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources, 1992: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1074, McKelvey Forum, p. 58-59.
Pearson, B.C., and Ellwood, K.B., 1987, Guide to the petroleum reference literature: Littleton, CO., Libraries Unlimited, Inc., 193 p.
Peirce, H.W., 1967, Permian stratigraphy of the Defiance Plateau, in Trauger, F.D., ed., Guidebook of Defiance-Zuni-Mount Taylor region: New Mexico Geological Society, 18th Field Conference, p. 57-62.
92

Peirce, H.W., 1976, Elements of Paleozoic tectonism in Arizona: Arizona Geological Society Digest vol. X, p. 37-57.
Peirce, H.W., 1979, The Mississippian and Pennsylvanian (Carboniferous) Systems in the United States - Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1110-Z, 20 p.
Peirce, H.W., 1982, The search for petroleum in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Fieldnotes, v. 12, n. 2, p. 1-5.
Peirce, H.W., 1985, Arizona's backbone: The transition zone: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Fieldnotes, v. 15, n. 3, p. 1-6.
Peirce, H.W., and Gerrard, T.A., 1966, Evaporites of the Permian Holbrook basin, Arizona, in Rau, J.L., ed., Second Symposium on Salt: Northern Ohio Geological Society, v. 1, p. 1-10.
Peirce, H.W., Jones, N., and Rogers, R., 1977, A survey of uranium favorability of Paleozoic rocks in the Mogollon Rim and Slope region east-central Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology Circular 19, 60 p.
Peirce, H.W., Keith, S.B., and Wilt, J.C., 1970, Coal, oil, natural gas, helium, and uranium in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Mines Bulletin, 182, 295 p.
Peirce, H.W., and Scurlock, J.R., 1972, Arizona well information: Arizona Bureau of Mines Bulletin 185, 195 p.
Pellerin, C., 1990, Geographic Information Systems: Federal demand for GIS is driving efforts to integrate the technology into mainstream computing: Federal Computer Week, May 14, 1990, p. 18-22.
Pelto, C.R., 1973, Forecasting ultimate oil recovery, in Symposium on petroleum economics and evaluation: Society of Petroleum Engineers, American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers, Dallas Section, SPE 4261, p. 45-52.
Penas, C., Hadsell, F., and Stout, J., 1986, An expert system for deterVibroseis field parameters: Geobyte, winter, p. 42-44.
Penn, B., 1991, Neural nets and image analysis: COGS Letter, The Computer Oriented Geological Society, December, p. 3, 9.
PennWell Publishing Company, 1980, International petroleum encyclopedia 1980: Tulsa, OK., PennWell Publishing Company, 464 p.
PennWell Publishing Company, 1988, Energy statistics sourcebook: Tulsa, OK., PennWell Publishing Company, 420 p.
Perrodon, A., 1980, Geodynamique petroliere, first edition: Pau, France, Elf-Aquitanine.
93

Perrodon, A., 1983, Dynamics of oil and gas accumulation: Pau, France, Bulletin des Centres de Recherches Exploration-Production ElfAquitaine, Memoir #5, 368 p.
Perrodon, A., and Masse, P., 1984, Subsidence, sedimentation and petroleum systems: Journal of Petroleum Geology, v. 7, n. 1, p. 5-26.
Peterson, J.A., Loleit, A.J., Spencer, C.W., and Ullrich, R.A., 1965, Sedimentary history and economic geology of San Juan basin: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 49, p. 2076-2119.
Peterson, J.A., editor, 1986, Paleotectonics and sedimentation in the Rocky Mountain region, United States: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 41.
Petroleum Information Corporation, 1981, New USGS resource estimates show natural gas up 23 percent, oil static: Denver, CO., P.I. Corporation, Energy Information, v. 10, n. 9, March 2nd, p. 1, 3.
Petroleum Information Corporation, 1984, Paradox basin: Unravelling the mystery: Denver, CO., P.I. Corporation, Petroleum Frontiers - A quaterly investigation into the nation's most promising petroleum horizons and provinces, v. 1, n. 4, summer, 54 p.
Petzet, G.A., 1991, U.S. drilling to rise unless oil prices slump: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 89, n. 4, Jan. 28th, p. 64-74.
Peuquet, D.J., and Marble, D.F., editors, 1990, Introductory readings in Geographic Information Systems: New York, NY., Taylor and Francis, Ltd., 371 p.
Philippi, G.T., 1965, On the depth, time, and mechanisms of petroleum generation: Geochemica et Cosmochemica Acta, v. 29, p. 1021-1049.
Phillips, K.A., 1987, Arizona industrial minerals, 2nd Ed.: Arizona Department of Mines and Mineral Resources, 185 p.
Picard, M.D., Brown, B.R., Loleit, A.J., and Parker, J.W., 1960, Geology of Pennsylvanian gas in Four Corners region: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 44, p. 1541-1569.
Pigott, J.D., 1986, Time, temperature, and tectonics: Their assessment as a means of evaluating shallow oil and gas potential in frontier areas, in Meyer, R.F., ed., Shallow oil and gas resources: United Nations Institute for Training and Research, Proceedings of the First International Conference, p. 35-44.
Pirson, S.J., 1946, Mathematical methods of decline curve extrapolation and reserve calculation: Oil Weekly, Sept. 9th, p. 45-49.
Pitcher, M.G., 1976, U.S. discovery rate tied to technology: Oil and Gas Journal, March 22nd, p. 34-35.
94

Pocock, C.C., 1979, Prospects for oil and gas: A look ahead to year 2000: World Oil, October, p. 107-111.
Podruski, J.S., Barclay, J.E., Hamblin, A.P., Lee, P.J., Osadetz, K.G., Procter, R.M., and Taylor, G.C., 1988, Conventional oil resources of Western Canada: Geological Survey of Canada Paper 87-26.
Pogue, J.E., and Hill, K.E., 1956, Future growth and financial requirements of the world petroleum industry: New York, NY., The Chase Manhattan Bank, Petroleum Department, 39 p.
Poole, F.G., and 7 others, 1967, Devonian of the Southwestern United States, in Oswald, D.H., ed., International Symposium on the Devonian System, Calgary, Alberta, Sept. 1967: Calgary, Alberta Society of Petroleum Geologists, v. 1, p. 879-912.
Poole, F.G., and Sandberg, C.A., 1977, Mississippian paleogeography and tectonics of the Western United States, in Stewart, J.H., Stevens, C.H., and Fritsche, A.E., eds., Paleozoic paleogeography of the Western United States: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Pacific Coast Paleogeography Symposium No. 1, p. 67-85.
Pople, H.E., 1977, The formation of composite hypotheses in diagnostic problem-solving: An exercise in synthetic reasoning, in Proceedings of the International Joint Conference of Artificial Intelligence, Cambridge, MA., August, p. 1030-1037.
Potential Gas Committee, 1967, Potential supply of natural gas in the United States as of December 31, 1966: Golden, CO., The Colorado School of Mines, Potential Gas Agency, 38 p.
Potential Gas Committee, 1973, Still plenty of natural gas in the United States: Golden, CO., The Colorado School of Mines, Potential Gas Agency, D.M. Evans, Director, News Release 6-13-73, 25 p.
Potential Gas Committee, 1977, A comparison of estimates of ultimately recoverable quantities of natural gas in the United States: Golden, CO., The Colorado School of Mines, Potential Gas Agency, H.C. Kent, Director, Gas Resources Studies, n. 1, April, 27 p.
Potential Gas Committee, 1979, Potential supply of natural gas in the United States (as of December 31, 1978): Golden, CO., The Colorado School of Mines, Potential Gas Agency, 75 p.
Potential Gas Committee, 1981, Potential Gas Committee estimates twice as much gas remaining as has been produced in past years: Golden, CO., The Colorado School of Mines, Potential Gas Agency, H.C. Kent, Director, News Release 5-18-81, 4 p.
Potential Gas Committee, 1987, Potential supply of natural gas in the United States (as of December 31, 1986): Golden, CO., The Potential
95

Gas Agency, Colorado School of Mines, 160 p.
Pratt, V.E., 1942, Oil in the Earth: Kansas University Press, 105 p.
Pratt, V.E., 1950, The earth's petroleum resources, in Fanning, L.M., ed., Our oil resources: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Book Company, p. 137-153.
Pratt, V.E., 1951, On the estimation of undiscovered oil reserves: Journal of Petroleum Technology, April, p. 9-10.
Pratt, V.P., and Brobst, D.A., 1974, Mineral [and oil and gas] potentials and problems: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 698, 20 p.
Prerau, D.S., 1985, Selection of an appropriate domain for an expert system: The AI Magazine, v. 6, n. 2, p. 26-30.
Price, L.C., 1983, Geologic time as a parameter in organic metamorphism and vitrinite reflectance as an absolute paleogeothermometer: Journal of Petroleum Geology, v. 6, p. 5-38.
Price, R.A., editor, 1989, Origin and evolution of sedimentary basins and their energy and mineral resources: American Geophysical Union Geophysical Monograph 48 and International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics Volume 3, 202 p.
Pritsker, A., and Alan, B., 1984, Introduction to simulation and SLAM II: New York, NY., John Viley and Sons, 612 p.
Procter, R.M., and Taylor, G.C., 1984, Evaluation of oil and gas potential of an offshore west coast Canada play: An example of Geological Survey of Canada methodology, in Masters, C.D., ed., Petroleum resources assessment: Ottawa, Canada, International Union of Geological Sciences Publication no. 17, p. 39-62.
Procter, R.M., Taylor, G.C., and Wade, J.A., 1984, Oil and natural gas resources of Canada 1983: Geological Survey of Canada Paper 83-31, 59 p.
Purves, V.J., 1976, Possible Arizona faulting as suggested by Mississippian facies analysis and plate tectonics - A stratotectonic approach, in Vilt, J.C., and Jenny, J.P., eds., Tectonic Digest, v. X: Arizona Geological Society, p. 259-286.
Pusey, V.C., 1973, How to evaluate potential gas and oil source rock: World Oil, v. 176, n. 5, p. 71-75.
Pye, V.D., 1961, General review of Arizona oil and gas possibilities and principles controlling oil and gas accumulations, in Oil, gas and helium in Arizona Its occurrence and potential: Arizona Development Board, Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission report, p. 42-59.
Pye, V.D., 1967, Arizona A new frontier to explore: Oil and Gas Jour-
96

nal, v. 65, May 8th, p. 168-172.
Radchenko, O.A., 1968, Geocheraical regularites in the distribution of the oil-bearing regions of the world: Jerusalem, Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Ltd., 312 p.
Raiffa, H., 1968, Decision analysis Introductory lectures on choices under uncertainty: Reading, MA., Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 309 p.
Rapoport, L.A., Grender, G.C., 1984, Probabilistic distribution of United States oil and gas discoveries for various levels of exploration drilling density (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 68, n. 4, p. 520.
Rasmus, D., 1989, A NEXPERT review: MacUser, Sept. 1989, p. 135-160.
Rauch-Hindin, W.B., 1985, Artificial intelligence in business, science, and industry, volume II: Applications: Englewood Cliffs, NJ., 348 p.
Rauch-Hindin, W.B., 1986, Artificial intelligence in business, science, and industry, volume I: Fundamentals: Englewood Cliffs, NJ., 331 p.
Rauzi, S.L., 1992, Oil and gas notes: Arizona Geological Survey, Arizona Geology, v. 22, n. 2, p. 9, 11.
Reboh, R., 1981, Knowledge engineering techniques and tools in the PROSPECTOR environment: Menlo Park, CA., SRI International, Artificial Intelligence Center, Final Report Projects 5821, 6415, and 8172, 149 p.
Reboh, R., Reiter, J., and Gaschnig, J., 1982, Development of a knowledgebased interface to a hydrological simulation program: Menlo Park, CA., SRI International, Technical Report 3477, May.
Reches, Z., 1978, Development of monoclines: Part I. Structure of the Palisades Creek branch of the east Kaibab monocline, Grand Canyon, Arizona, in Matthews, V., Ill, ed., Laramide folding associated with basement block faulting in the Western United States: Geological Society of America Memoir 151, p. 235-272.
Reed, M.J., 1983, Assessment of low-temperature geothermal resources of the United States - 1982: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 892, 73 P-
Reeside, J.B., Jr., and Baker, A.A., 1929, The Cretaceous section in Black Mesa, northeastern Arizona: Journal of the Washington Academy of Science, v. 19, p. 30-37.
Reiter, M., and Clarkson, G., 1983, A note on terrestrial heat flow in the Colorado Plateau: Geophysical Research Letters, v. 10, p. 929-932.
97

Reiter, M., Mansure, A.J., and Shearer, C., 1979, Geothermal characteristics of the Colorado Plateau: Tectonophysics, v. 61, p. 183195.
Reiter, M., and Shearer, C., 1979, Terrestrial heat flow in eastern Arizona: A first report: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 84, p. 6115-6120.
Rejeski, D., 1990, Distributed model-based expert systems in CIS environments: Fourth International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, July 23-27, 1990, Zurich, Switzerland, 5 p.
Rejeski, D., and Kapuscinski, J., 1990, Risk modeling with Geographic Information Systems: Approaches and issues: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Information Resources Management, Program Systems Division unspecified report, May, 1990, 30 p.
Repenning, C.A., and Page, H.G., 1956, Late Cretaceous stratigraphy of Black Mesa, Navajo and Hopi Indian Reservations, Arizona: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 40, p. 255-294.
Resnick, V.S., 1987, Multiregressional models for ranged estimates of the petroleum potential of sedimentary basins: Journal of Petroleum Geology, v. 10, n. 1, p. 87-100.
Resources For The Future, 1978, Oil and gas resources Welcome to uncertainty: Washington, D.C., Resources For The Future, Inc., Special Issue, n. 58, 16 p.
Reynolds, M.W., and Dolly, E.D., editors, 1983, Mesozoic paleogeography of the West-central United States: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Rocky Mountain Section, Symposium #2, 391 P-
Reynolds, M.W., Palacas, J.G., and Elston, D.P., 1988, Potential petroleum source rocks in the Late Proterozoic Chuar Group, Grand Canyon, Arizona, in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources - 1988 program and abstracts: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1025, p. 49-50.
Reynolds, S.J., 1982, Geologic features of northeastern Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Fieldnotes, v. 12, n. 1, p. 1-8.
Reynolds, S.J., 1988, Geologic map of Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey, map 26, scale 1:1,000,000.
Reynolds, S.J., Haxel, G.B., Richard, S.M., Tosdal, R.M., and Laubach, S.E., 1988, Geologic setting of Mesozoic and Cenozoic metamorphism in Arizona, in Ernst, W.G., ed., Metamorphism and crustal evolution of the Western United States: Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice-Hall, Inc., Rubey Volume VII, p. 466-501.
98

Reynolds, S.J., Roddy, M.S., and Velty, J.V., 1986, Map of Paleozoic rocks and conodont alteration indices in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Open-File Report 86-1, scale 1:1,000,000.
Reynolds, S.J., and Trapp, R.A., 1986, Computerized databases and database-access programs of the Arizona Geological Survey: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Open-File Report 86-7, 69 p.
Reynolds, S.J., Velty, J.V., and Spencer, J.E., 1986, Volcanic history of Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Fieldnotes, v. 16, n. 2, p. 1-5.
Rhind, D., 1989, Why CIS? Redlands, CA., Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc., ARC News, v. 11, n. 3, summer issue reprint, 4 p.
Rhode, D.R., 1982, History and petroleum potential of the Mississippian Leadville Formation in the western San Juan basin and adjoining Four Corners platform area, New Mexico and Arizona: unpublished M.S. thesis, University of Colorado, 82 p.
Rice, D.D., editor, 1986, Oil and gas assessment Methods and Applications: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology #21, 267 p.
Rich, C., and Waters, R.C., editors, 1986, Readings in artificial intelligence and software engineering: Los Altos, CA., Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 602 p.
Rich, E., 1983, Artificial intelligence: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Book Company, 436 p.
Riedel, V.R., 1989, IDENTIFY: A Prolog program to help identify fossils: Computers and Geosciences, v. 15, n. 5, p. 809-823.
Riedel, V.R., and Tway, L.E., 1990, Artificial intelligence in paleontology and stratigraphy, in Agterberg, P.P., and Bonham-Carter, G.F., eds., Statistical applications in the Earth sciences: Geological Survey of Canada Paper 89-9, Proceedings of a colloquium, Ottawa, Ontario, Nov. 14-18, 1988, p. 383-388.
Ripple, V.J., editor, 1987, Geographic Information Systems in resource management: A compendium: American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 288 p.
Risch, T., Reboh, R., Hart, P.E., and Duda, R.O., 1988, A functional approach to integrating database and expert systems: Communications of the ACM, Association for Computing Machinery, v. 31, n. 12, p. 1424-1437.
Ritchie, G.D., and Hanna, F.K., 1984, A case study in AI methodology: Artificial Intelligence, v. 23, n. 3, p. 249-268.
99

Riva, J.P., Jr., 1983, World petroleum resources and reserves: Boulder, CO., Westview Press, Special Study, 355 p.
Roadifer, J.E., 1966, Stratigraphy of the Petrified Forest National Park, Arizona: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Arizona, 152 P-
Roadifer, R.E., 1975, A probability approach to estimate volumes of undiscovered oil and gas, in Grenon, M., ed., First IIASA Conference on Energy Resources: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, p. 333-343.
Robert, P., 1988, Organic metamorphism and geothermal history: Boston, MA., Elf-Aquitaine and D. Reidel Publishing Company, 311 p.
Robinson, E.A., 1985, Probability theory and applications: Boston, MA., International Human Resources Development Corporation, 420 p.
Robinson, G., and Jackson, M., 1985, Expert systems in map design, in Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Automated Cartography, Washington, D.C., March, 1985, p. 430-439.
Robinson, J.E., 1982, Computer applications in petroleum geology: New York, NY., Hutchinson Ross Publishing Company, distributed by Van Nostrand Reinhold Publishing Company, Inc., 164 p.
Robinson, V.B., Frank, A.U., and Karimi, H.A., 1987, Expert systems for Geographic Information Systems in resource management: AI Applications, v. 1, n. 1, p. 47-57.
Robinson, V.B., and Miller, R., 1989, Intelligent polygon overlay processing for natural resource inventory maintenance: Prototyping a knowledge-based spurious polygon processor: AI Applications, v. 3, n. 4, p. 23-34.
Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists, 1981, Exploration geologists declared ineffective: Rocky Mounain Association of Geologists Newsletter, March, 1981, p. 1.
Roehl, P.O., and Choquette, P.W., editors, 1985, Carbonate petroleum reservoirs: New York, NY., Springer-Verlag, Inc., Casebooks in Earth Sciences Series, 622 p.
Roller, J.A., 1987, Fracture history of the Redwall Limestone and Lower Supai Group, western Hualapai Indian Reservation, northwestern Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 87-359, 33 p.
Root, D.H., and Attanasi, E.D., 1992, Oil field growth in the United States How much is left in the barrel? (abst.), in Carter, L.M.H., ed., USGS research on energy resources, 1992: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1074, McKelvey Forum, p. 68.
Root, D.H., and Drew, L.J., 1979, The pattern of petroleum discovery rates: American Scientist, v. 67, n. 6, p. 648-652.
100

Ronov, A.B., 1958, Organic carbon in sedimentary rocks (in relation to the presence of petroleum): Geochemistry, n. 5, p. 510-536.
Rose, P.R., 1975, Procedures for assessing U.S. petroleum resources and utilization of results, in Grenon, M., ed., First IIASA Conference on Energy Resources: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, p. 291-309.
Rose, P.R., 1983, Risk, uncertainty, and improving exploration performance: Society of Independent Professional Earth Scientists Bulletin, n. 10, p. 7-26.
Rose, P.R., 1987, Dealing with risk and uncertainty in exploration: How can we improve?: American Associantion of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 71, p. 1-16.
Rosenberg, J.M., 1986, Dictionary of artificial intelligence and robotics: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, 203 p.
Ross, C.A., 1979, Late Paleozoic collision of North and South America: Geology, v. 7, p. 41-44.
Ross, C.A., and Ross, J.R.P., 1986, Paleozoic paleotectonics and sedimentation in Arizona and New Mexico, in Peterson, J.A., ed., Paleotectonics and sedimentation in the Rocky Mountain region, United States: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 41, p. 653-668.
Rountree, R., 1981, Drilling activity light in Arizona but there's still hope for increase in 1981: Western Oil Reporter, v. 38, n. 1, p. 98.
Roy, K.J., 1975, Hydrocarbon assessment using subjective probability and Monte Carlo methods, in Grenon, M., ed., First IIASA Conference on Energy Resources: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, p. 345-359.
Roy, K.J., Procter, R.M., and McCrossan, R.G., 1975, Hydrocarbon assessment using subjective probability, in Probability methods in oil exploration: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Research Symposium, Stanford University, Aug. 20-22, 1975, p. 56-60.
Roy, K.J., and Ross, W.A., 1980, Apportioning estimates of basin potential to fields, in Miall, A.D., ed., Facts and principles of world petroleum occurrence: Calgary, Canada, Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 6, p. 319-328.
Rozendal, R.A., 1984, Conventional United States oil and gas remaining to be discovered (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 68, n. 4, p. 524.
Rozendal, R.A., 1986, Conventional U.S. oil and gas remaining to be discovered: Estimates and methodology used by Shell Oil Company, in
101

Rice, D.D., ed., Oil and gas assessment Methods and applications: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Studies in Geology No. 21, p. 151-158.
Rudolph, B., 1987, Enjoy now, pay later: As oil imports rise and output falls, the U.S. may face a future shock: Time Magazine, March 16th, 1987, p. 54-55.
Ruedisili, L.C., and Firebaugh, M.., 1982, Perspectives on energy: Issues, ideas, and environmental dilemmas, 3rd Edition: New York, NY., Oxford University Press, 605 p.
Rumelhart, D.E., and McClelland, J.L., 1986 and 1987, Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, volumes I and II: Cambridge, MA., MIT Press.
Rumelhart, D.E., and McClelland, J.L., 1988, Explorations in parallel distributed processing: A handbook of models, programs, and exercises: Cambridge, MA., MIT Press.
Russel, S.J., 1989, The use of knowledge in analogy and induction: Research notes in artificial intelligence: San Mateo, CA., Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 164 p.
Ryan, J.T., 1965, Limitations of statistical methods for predicting petroleum and natural gas reserve and availability: Society of Petroleum Engineers of AIME, Preprint number SPE 1256, 40th Annual Fall Meeting, Denver, CO.
Ryan, J.T., 1973, An estimate of the conventional crude-oil potential in Alberta: Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology, v. 21, n. 2, p. 219-235.
Rychener, M.D., 1985, Expert systems for engineering design: Expert Systems, v. 2, n. 1, January, p. 30-44.
Ryder, R.T., 1983, Petroleum potential of wilderness lands in Arizona, in Miller, B.M., ed., Petroleum potential of wilderness lands in the Western United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 902, p. 1-22.
Sagalowicz, D., 1984, Development of an expert system: Expert Systems, v. 1, n. 2, October, p. 137-147.
Sandberg, G.W., and Lyons, T.R., 1962, Southwest Utah-northwest Arizona is a good place to look for oil: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 60, n. 17, p. 140-145.
Sanford, R.F., 1982, Preliminary model of regional Mesozoic groundwater flow and uranium deposition in the Colorado Plateau: Geology, v. 10, p. 348-352.
Sauk, .A., and Sumner, J.S., 1971, Residual aeromagnetic map of Arizona: Tucson, AZ., University of Arizona, Department of Geosciences, scale
102

1:1,000,000.
Scanlon, A.H., 1983, Oil and gas fields map of Colorado: Colorado Geological Survey Map Series 22, scale 1:500,000.
Scarborough, R.B., 1984, Cenozoic erosion and sedimentation in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Open-File Report 85-3, 61 p.
Scarborough, R.B., 1986, Map of Mid-Tertiary (40-15 my) volcanic, plutonic, and sedimentary rock outcrops in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology map 20, scale 1:1,000,000.
Schaber, G.G., and Brown, W.E., 1972, Long-wavelength radar images of northern Arizona: A geologic evaluation, in U.S. Geological Survey research - 1972, Chapter B: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 800-B, p. 175-181.
Schanz, J.J., Jr., 1978, Oil and gas resources Welcome to uncertainty: Washington, D.C., Resources for the Future, Inc., Special Issue, #58, p. 1-16.
Schaub, A., 1989, What makes up an expert system and how does it work?: InfoWorld, April 24th, p. 44.
Schmidt, N., Reynolds, S.J., and Horstman, K.C., 1991, AZGEOBIB A preliminary list of references on the geology of Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey, Open-File Report 91-4, 302 p.
Schorr, H., and Rappaport, A., editors, 1989, Innovative applications of artificial intelligence: Menlo Park, CA., AAAI Press 363 p.
Schuenemeyer, J.H., and Attanasi, E.D., 1984, Forecasting rate of hydrocarbon discoveries in a changing economic environment: Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 1, p. 313-318.
Schuenemeyer, J.H., and Drew, L.J., 1983, A procedure to estimate the parent population of the size of oil and gas fields as revealed by a study economic truncation: Mathematical Geology, v. 15, n. 1, p. 145-162.
Schuenemeyer, J.H., Drew, L.J., and Bawiec, W.J., 1980, A three-dimensional model to predit future oil discoveries in spatially connected multiple plays: Mathematical Geology, v. 12, n. 5, p. 459-472.
Schultz, P.R., 1952, What is the future of petroleum discovery?: Oil and Gas Journal, July 28th, p. 258-259 and 295-300.
Sciple, L., 1991a, Neural nets in the real world (Expert systems in AI): The Computer Oriented Geological Society, COGS Letter, Feb., 1991, p. 1-5.
Sciple, L., 1991b, PC-based programs to develop expert systems and neural
103

networks: The Computer Oriented Geological Society, COGS Letter, Feb., 1991, p. 10, 12.
Scotese, C.R., Banbach, R.K., Barton, C., VanDerVoo, R., and Ziegler, A.M., 1979, Paleozoic base maps: Journal of Geology, v. 87, p. 217-278.
Scott, K.C., 1975, Hydrogeologic and geophysical analysis of selected diatremes in the Hopi Buttes area, Arizona: unpublished M.S. thesis Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ., 129 p.
Scott, W.A., Turner, R.M., and McCammon, R.B., 1981, Research on uranium resource models, a progess report: Part IV, LOGIC, a computer graphics program to construct integrated logic circuits for genetic-geologic models: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-0556, 21 p.
Scurlock, J.R., 1967, Geologic structure map of northeastern Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, scale 1:375,000.
Scurlock, J.R., 1971, Geologic structure map of northern Arizona: Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, scale 1:375,000.
Seager, W.R., 1970, Low-angle gravity glide structures in the northern Virgin Mountains, Nevada and Arizona: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 81, p. 1517-1538.
Searle, J.R., 1990, Is the brain's mind a computer program?: Scientific American, v. 262, n. 1, p. 26-31.
Sears, J.W., 1973, Structural geology of the Precambrian Grand Canyon Series, Arizona: unpublished M.S. thesis, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY., 100 p.
See, P.D., 1963, Nomenclature chart of the Four Corners area, in Bass, R.O., ed., Shelf carbonates of the Paradox basin: A symposium: Four Corners Geological Society, 4th Field Conference, p. 2-4.
Seigneurin, A., 1975, Probabilistic evaluation technique, in Grenon, M., ed., First IIASA Conference on Energy REsources: Laxenburg, Austria, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, p. 373-381.
Selley, R.C., 1978, Ancient sedimentary environments, 2nd Edition: Ithaca, NY., Cornell University Press, 287 p.
Semenovich, V.V., and others, 1977, Methods used in the USSR for estimating potential petroleum resources, in Meyer, R.F., ed., The future supply of nature-made petroleum and gas: New York, NY., Pergamon Press, p. 139-153.
Shafer, D., 1991, Ask the expert: Ten suggestions for knowledge acquisition: PC AI Intelligent Solutions for Desktop Computers, v. 5, n. 2, March/April 1991, p. 18-19.
104

Shakel, D.W., 1975, "Colorado Plateau uplift" - persistent myth of Arizona geology (abst.) : Geological Society of America, v. 7, p. 1265
Shannon, P.M., and Naylor, D., 1989, Petroleum basin studies: Boston, MA., Graham and Trotman, Inc., 206 p.
Shapiro, S., editor, 1987, The encyclopedia of artificial intelligence, volumes 1 and 2: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1219 P-
Shapley, D., 1975, Senate study predicts U.S. oil "exhaustion": Science, v. 187, March 21st, 1975, p. 1064.
Shaw, E.W., 1919, The income and expense of natural gas production: Natural Gas Association of America, Proceedings of 14th Annual Meeting, May 19-22, p. 479-503.
Shea, G., 1988, Formula for the field - A simple method for shifting probability of area: National Association for Search and Rescue, Response Magazine, May/June, p. 20-24.
Shearer, C.R., 1979, A regional terrestrial heat flow study in Arizona: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation: Socorro, NM., New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, 184 p.
Shearer, C.R., and Reiter, M., 1981, Terrestrial heat flow in Arizona: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 86, p. 6249-6260.
Sheldon, R.P., 1976, Estimates of undiscovered petroleum resources A perspective: U.S. Geological Survey Annual Report, Fiscal Year 1975, p. 11-22.
Shine, J.A., 1985, Bayesian, fuzzy, belief: Which logic works best?, in Proceedings of the American Society of Photogrammetry, Washington, D.C., March, 1985, p. 676-679.
Shirley, K., 1985, Oil found beneath volcanic blanket: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Explorer, v. 6, n. 8, p. 6-7, 28.
Shirley, K., 1991, Systems can provide the big picture - concept gaining momentum: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Explorer, v. 12, n. 5, May, p. 6, 7, 19.
Shiryayev, A.N., 1984, Probability: Graduate Texts in Mathematics 95: New York, NY., springer-Verlag, Inc., 577 p.
Shoemaker, E.M., 1975, Late Cenozoic faulting and uplift of the Colorado Plateau (abst.): Geological Society of America, Abstracts with programs, v. 7, n. 7, p. 1270.
Shoemaker, E.M., Squires, R.L., and Abrams, M.J., 1978, Bright Angel and Mesa Butte fault systems of northern Arizona, in Smith, R.B., and
105

Eaton, G.P., eds., Cenozoic tectonics and regional geophysics of the western Cordillera: Geological Society of America Memoir 152, p. 341-367.
Short, N.M., Lowman, P.D., Jr., Freden, S.C., and Finch, W.A., Jr., 1976, Mission to Earth: LANDSAT views the world: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, produced by General Electric Company, Beltsville Pholographic Engineering Laboratory, 459 p.
Shortliffe, E.H., and Buchanan, B.C., 1975, A model of inexact reasoning in medicine: Mathematical Biosciences, v. 23, p. 351-379.
Shultz, A.W., Fang, J.H., Burston, M.R., Chen, H.C., and Beasley, M., 1986, An expert system for determination of clastic depositional environments (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 70, n. 5, p. 647-648.
Shultz, A.W., Fang, J.H., Burston, M.R., Chen, H.C., and Reynolds, S., 1988, XEOD: An expert system for determining clastic depositional environments: Geobyte, May, v. 3, n. 2, p. 22-32.
Silver, L.T., and McGetchin, T.R., 1978, The nature of the basement beneath the Colorado Plateau and some implications for plateau uplifts: Lunar and Planetary Institute Conference Contribution 329, p. 45-46.
Simpson, R.W., Jachens, R.C., Saltus, R.W., and Blakely, R.J., 1986, Isostatic residual gravity, topographic and first-vertical-derivative gravity map of the conterminous United States: U.S. Geological Survey Geophysical Investigations Map GP-975, scale 1:7,500,000.
Size, W.B., editor, 1987, Use and abuse of statistical methods in the Earth sciences: New York, NY., Oxford University Press, International Association for Mathematical Geology, Studies in Mathematical Geology No. 1, 169 p.
Slagle, J.R., and Hamburger, H., 1985, An expert system for a resource allocation problem: Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, v. 28, n. 9, September, p. 994-1004.
Sluijk, D., and Parker, J.R., 1984, Comparison of predrilling predictions with post-drilling outcomes, using Shell's prospect appraisal system (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 68, p. 528.
Smith, J.T., 1991, The petroleum system as an exploration tool in a frontier setting (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 75, n. 3, p. 673.
Smith, M.B., 1968, Estimate reserves by using computer simulation method: Oil and Gas Journal, March llth, p. 81-84.
Smith, P.V., Jr., 1954, Studies on origin of petroleum Occurrence of
106

hydrocarbons in recent sediments: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 38, p. 377-404.
Smith, R.B., and Eaton, G.P., editors, 1978, Cenozoic tectonics and regional geophysics of the western Cordillera: Geological Society of America Memoir 152, 388 p.
Smith, R.G., 1984, On the development of commercial expert systems: The AI Magazine, v. 5, n. 3, Fall 1984, p. 61-73.
Smith, R.G., and Baker, J.D., 1983, The Dipmeter Advisor System A case study in commercial expert system development, in Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Karlsruhe, West Germany, August, p. 122-129.
Smith, R.G., and Young, R.L., 1984, The design of the DIPMETER ADVISOR system: Proceedings of the Association for Computing Machinery, Conference, November.
Smith, V.K., 1988, Resource evaluation at the crossroads: Washington, D.C., Resources for the Future, Inc., n. 90, winter, p. 2-6.
Snarskiy, A.N., 1962, Primary migration of oil: Petroleum Geology, v. 6, p. 700-703.
Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, 1982, How to assess maturation [of hydrocarbons] and paleotemperatures, Short Course #7, 289 p.
Sofer, Z., 1984, Stable carbon isotope compositions of crude oils: Application to source, depositional environments, and petroleum generation: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 68, p. 31-49.
Soller, D.R., 1991, Applying CIS to resource management: Geotimes, July, v. 36, n. 7, p. 16-18.
Soller, D.R., Stettner, W.R., Lanfear, K.J., and Aitken, D.S., 1990, A user's manual for a method of map scanning and digital editing for thematic map production and data-base construction: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1054, 38 p.
Spencer, J.E., 1983, Helium resources and production in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Fieldnotes, v. 13, n. 2, p. 6-7, 15-16.
Spurr, W.A., and Bonini, C.P., 1973, Statistical analysis for business decisions: Homewood, IL., Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 724 p.
Stanley, J., 1990, Introduction to neural networks: Computer simulations of biological intelligence, 3rd Ed.: Sierra Madre, CA., California Scientific Software, 255 p.
Staplin, F.L., 1969, Sedimentary organic matter, organic metamorphism and
107

oil and gas occurrence: Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum, v. 17, p. 47-66.
Staplin, F.L., and 7 others, 1982, How to assess [hydrocarbon] maturation and paleotemperatures: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Short Course no. 7, 289 p.
Stark, P.H., and Gordon, M.S., 1982, Exploratory drilling and distribution of hydrocarbon shows in the western thrust belt of the U.S., in Powers, R.B., ed., Geologic studies of the Cordilleran thrust belt, vol. II: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists, p. 507519.
Stearn, C.., Carroll, R.L., and Clark, T.H., 1979, Geological evolution of North America, 3rd Edition: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, 566 p.
Steinhart, J., and Bultman, M., 1983, How undiscovered oil is estimated: Oceanus, v. 26, n. 3, p. 40-45.
Stevenson, G.M., 1983, Paleozoic rocks of the San Juan basin: An exploration frontier, in Fassett, J.E., ed., Oil and gas fields of the Four Corners area, vol. Ill: Four Corners Geological Society, p. 780-788.
Stevenson, G.M., and Baars, D.L., 1987, The Paradox: A pull-apart basin of Pennsylvanian age, in Campbell, J.A., ed., Geology of Cataract Canyon and vicinity: Four Corners Geological Society, 10th Field Conference, p. 31-50.
Stewart, J.H., Poole, F.G., and Wilson, R.F., 1972, Stratigraphy and origin of the Triassic Moenkopi Formation and related strata in the Colorado Plateau region: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 691, 195 p.
Stewart, J.H., Stevens, C.H., and Fritsche, A.E., editors, Paleozoic paleogeography of the Western United States: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Pacific Coast Paleogeography Symposium No. 1, 502 p.
Stock, M., 1987, AI and expert systems: An overview: AI Applications, v. 1, n. 1, p. 9-17.
Stock, M., 1988, AI theory and applications in the VAX environment: New York, NY., Intertext Publications, 214 p.
Stoian, E., 1965, Fundamentals and applications of the Monte Carlo method: Journal of Canadian Petroleum Technology, v. 4, p. 120-129.
Stokes, .L., 1986, Geology of Utah: Utah Museum of Natural History at the University of Utah and Utah Geological and Mineral Survey, Department of Natural Resources, Occasional Paper Number 6 of the Utah Museum of Natural History, Salt Lake City, Utah, 307 p.
108

Stone, C., and Witcher, J.C., 1982 (1983), final contract report: Geothermal energy in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Open-File Report 83-12, prepared for the U.S. Department of Energy, Division of Geothermal Energy, contract no. DE-FC0779ID12009, 398 p.
Stoneley, R., 1981, Petroleum: The sedimentary basin, in Tarling, D.H., Economic geology and geotectonics: Boston, MA., Blackwell Scientific Publications, p. 51-71.
Stout, J., 1985, Geologic computer systems ^get smart': American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Explorer, v. 6, n. 7, July, p. 26-28.
Stout, J., 1986, An expert system for carbonate reservoirs (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 70, p. 1057-1058.
Stover, C.W., Reagor, B.C., and Algermissen, S.T., 1986, Seismicity map of the State of Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-1852, scale 1:1,000,000.
Stoyanow, A.A., 1942, Paleozoic paleogeography of Arizona: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 53, p. 1258-1282.
Stremel, K., 1984, Arizona expects more wildcat drilling: Western Oil Reporter, v. 41, January, p. 30.
Strobel, J.S., 1989, The simulation of the sedimentary fill of basins and the characterization of hydrocarbon plays by an expert system: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of South Carolina, 213 p.
Strobell, J.D., Jr., 1958, Salient stratigraphic and structural features of the Carrizo Mountains area, Arizona-New Mexico, in Sanborn, A.F., ed., Guidebook to the geology of the Paradox basin: Intermountain Association of Petroleum Geologists, 9th Field Conference, p. 66-73.
Summers, E., 1989, Artificial intelligence: Monotonic expert system: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Developments, July, p. 136-145.
Summers, E., 1990a, NEXPERT OBJECT expert system: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Developments, July, v. 7, n. 7, p. 182-189.
Summers, E., 1990b, MAC BRAIN Image recognition using neural networks: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Developments, April, v. 7, issue 4, p. 75-79.
Summers, E., 1991a, Mahogany Professional expert system: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Developments, March, v. 8, issue 3, p. 78-81.
Summers, E., 1991b, Neural networks: U.S. Geological Survey, Information Systems Developments, August, v. 8, issue 8, p. 234-239.
109

Sumner, J.S., 1975, Bouguer gravity map of Arizona: Tucson, AZ., University of Arizona, Department of Geosciences, Laboratory of Geophysics, scale 1:1,000,000.
Sumner, J.S., Schmidt, J.S., and Aiken, C.L.V., 1976, Analysis of freeair gravity anomalies of Arizona, in Wilt, J.C., and Jenney, J.P., eds., Tectonic Digest: Arizona Geological Society, v. X, p. 7-12.
Sutton, R.L., 1974, The geology of Hopi Buttes, Arizona, in Karlstrom, T.N.V., and others, eds., Geology of northern Arizona, Part II: Geological Society of America, p. 649-671.
Swapp, C.W., 1961, The geology and oil and gas possibilities of northwestern Arizona, in Oil, gas, and helium in Arizona - Its occurrence and potential: Arizona Development Board for the Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, p. 35-41.
Swartout, W.R., 1983, EXPLAIN: A system for creating and explaining expert consulting programs: Artificial Intelligence, v. 21, n. 3, September, p. 285-325.
Szabo, E., 1968, Pennsylvanian tectonics of the Paradox region in Utah, Arizona, New Mexico and Colorado: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Albuquerque, NM., University of New Mexico, 144 p.
Takahashi, K.I., Dyman, T.S., and Magoon, L.B., 1988, Computer applications, in Magoon, L.B., ed., Petroleum systems of the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1870, p. 65-68.
Tanic, E., 1986, Urban planning and artificial intelligence: The URBYS system: Computer, Environment, and Urban Systems, v. 10(3-4), p. 135-146.
Tanimoto, S.L., 1987, The elements of artificial intelligence: An introduction using LISP: Rockville, MD., Computer Science Press, 530 p.
Tanner, W.F., 1965, Upper Jurassic paleogeography of the Four Corners area: Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 35, p. 564-574.
Tanner, W.F., 1978, Future oil: What is the outlook?: World Oil, November, p. 123-124, 128, 133, 136, 140.
Taylor, D.J., 1992, NERSL National Energy Research Seismic Library (abst.), in Magoon, L.B., editor, The petroleum system Status of research and methods, 1992: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 2007, p. 79-80.
Teichert, C., 1965, Devonian rocks and paleogeography of central Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 464, 181 p.
Telford, W.M., Geldart, L.P., Sheriff, R.E., and Keys, D.A., 1976 (1982 printing), applied geophysics: New York, NY., Cambridge University Press, 860 p.
110

Terra Graphics, 1977a, Oil and gas production map of the United States: Denver, CO., Terra Graphics, Inc., scale about 1:3,170,000.
Terra Graphics, 1977b, Oil and gas production of the Rocky Mountain region, Denver, CO., Terra Graphics, Inc., scale approximately 1:1,650,000.
Thaden, R.E., 1989, Geologic map of the Fort Defiance quadrangle, Apache County, Arizona and McKinley County, New Mexico: U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle map GQ-1648, scale 1:24,000.
Thaden, R.E., 1990, Geologic map of the Window Rock quadrangle, Apache County, Arizona, and McKinley County, New Mexico: U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle map GQ-1647, scale 1:24,000.
Thaden, R.E., and Zech, R.S., 1984, Preliminary structure contour map on the base of the Cretaceous Dakota Sandstone in the San Juan basin and vicinity, New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-1673, scale 1:500,000.
Theobald, P.K., Schweinfurth, S.P., and Duncan, D.C., 1972, Energy resources of the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 650, 27 p.
Thiel, M.F., 1979, World oil and OPEC: The razor's edge: World Oil, October, p. 123-133.
Thompson, B.A., and Thompson, W.A., 1985, Inside an expert system: Byte, April, p. 315-330.
Thompson, G.A., and Zoback, M.L., 1979, Regional geophysics of the Colorado Plateau: Textonophysics, v. 61, p. 149-182.
Thorn, C.R., and Dam, W.L., 1989, Use of Geographic Information System to display water-quality data from San Juan basin (abst.): American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 73, n. 9.
Thornbury, W.D., 1965, Regional geomorphology of the United States: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 609 p.
Thurber, S., 1987, XXXPERT, ver. 6: Vienna, VA., [computer software program, copyrighted].
Till, R., 1974, Statistical methods for the Earth scientist An introduction: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 154 p.
Time Magazine, 1978, Oil: What's left out there? - A new study delays doomsday, but there is still a crisis: Time, Oct. 16th, p. 91-92.
Tiratsoo, E.N., 1984, Oilfields of the world, 3rd Edition: Beaconsfield, England, Scientific Press, Ltd., 392 p.
Ill

Tissot, B.P., Pelet, R., and Ungerer, P., 1987, Thermal history of sedimentary basins, maturation indices, and kinetics of oil and gas generation: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 71, n. 12, p. 1445-1466.
Tissot, B.P., and Welte, D.H., 1978, Petroleum formation and occurrence: A new approach to oil and gas exploration: New York, NY., SpringerVerlag Publishers, 538 p.; also, 1984, 2nd Edition, 699 p.
Tissot, B.P., and Welte, D.H., 1984, Petroleum formation and occurrence, 2nd Edition: New York, NY., Springer-Verlag Publishers, 699 p.
Tomlinson, R.F., and Boyle, A.R., 1981, The state of development of systems for handling national resources inventory data: Cartographica, v. 18, p. 65-95.
Tomlinson, R.F., Calkins, H.W., and Marble, D.F., 1976, Computer Handling of geographical data: Paris, France, The UNESCO Press, Natural Resources Research Report No. 13.
Tooker, E.W., compiler-editor, 1989, Arizona's industrial rock and mineral resources - Workshop proceedings: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1905, 93 p.
Trask, P.D., 1937, Inferences about the origin of oil as indicated by the composition of organic constituents of sediments: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 186-H, p. 147-157.
Trask, P.D., Hammar, H.E., and Wu, C.C., 1932, Oirigin and environment of source sediments of petroleum: American Petroleum Institute Report, 323 p.
Trask, P.D., and Patnode, H.W., 1942, Source beds of petroleum: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 561 p.
Truebe, H.A., 1991, Application of Geographic Information System technology to the recognition of prospecting targets in the eastern half of the Tucson quadrangle, Arizona: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Arizona, 215 p.
Tucker, M.L., 1983, Geochemical correlation of crude oil and source rocks in Black Mesa basin, northeastern Arizona: unpublished M.S. thesis, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ., 80 p.
Turing, A.M., 1950, Computing machinery and intelligence: Mind, v. 59, p. 433-460.
Turnbow, D.R., 1961, Devonian and Mississippian rocks of the Four Corners area, in Berg, R.R., and Rold, J.W., eds., Symposium on Lower and Middle Paleozoic rocks of Colorado: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists, 12th Field Conference, p. 71-80.
Turner, B.J., Skidmore, A.K., Croome, R.J., and Win, U.S., 1989, Potential of remotely sensed and ancillary data to define floral and faunal habitats through an expert system approach, in Global natural
112

resource monitoring and assessments: Preparing for the 21st Century Proceedings, vol. 2, International Conference and Workshop, Sept. 24-30, 1989, Venezia, Italy: Agricoltura 2000, p. 948-958.
Turner, D.S., 1961, Black Mesa basin - It's a prime gas target for tomorrow: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 59, n. 17, p. 148-150.
Turner, D.S., 1968, Natural gas in Black Mesa basin, northeastern Arizona, in Beebe, W., ed., Natural gases of North America: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 9, vol. 2, p. 1357-1370.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D., 1974, Judgments under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Science, v. 185, p. 1124-1131.
Tweto, 0., and Sims, P.K., 1963, Precambrian ancestry of the Colorado mineral belt: Geological Society of American Bulletin, v. 74, p. 991-1914.
Uhler, R.S., and Bradley, P., 1970, Stochastic models for determining the economic prospects of petroleum exploration over large regions: Journal of the American Statistical Association, v. 65, n. 330, p. 623-630.
Ulmishek, G.F., and Klemme, H.D., 1990, Depositional controls, distribution, and effectiveness of world's petroleum source rocks: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1931, 59 p.
Uman, M.F., James, W.R., and Tomlinson, H.R., 1979, Oil and gas in offshore tracts: Estimates before and after drilling: Science, v. 205, p. 489-491.
United Nations CCOP Project Office, 1981, Assessment of undiscovered oil and gas: Committee for Coordination of Joint Prospecting for Mineral Resources in Asian Offshore Areas, Proceedings of the Seminar, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, March, 1980, Tech. Pub. 10, 286 p.
United States Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey, 1976, Principles of the mineral resource classification system of the U.S. Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1450-A, 5 p.
United States Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey, 1980, Principles of a resource/reserve classification for minerals: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 831, 5 p.
United States Department of Energy, 1985, Increased understanding of the 300-billion-barral U.S. residual oil resource and the technologies to produce it: Department of Energy BC-85/6/SP, 37 p.
United States Department of Energy, 1987, Geoscience research for oil and gas discovery and recovery: Department of Energy, 28 p.
United States Department of the Interior, 1960, Resources of coal, petro-
113

leum, natural gas, oil shale, and tar sands in the United States and allied and neutral countries: Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, United States Congress, March, 1960, p. 1-43.
United States Geological Survey, 1922, The oil supply of the U.S.: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 6, p. 42-46.
United States Geological Survey, 1951, Fuels reserves of the United States - A statement prepared at request of Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs: U.S. Senate 82nd Congress, First Session, 49 p.
United States Geological Survey, 1970, The national atlas of the United States of America: U.S. Geological Survey, 417 p.
United States Geological Survey, 1974, USGS releases revised U.S. oil and gas estimates: U.S. Geological Survey News Release, March 26th, 5 p.
United States Geological Survey, 1980, On the RAGged edge of uncertainty: U.S. Geological Survey Cross-section newsletter, v. 2, n. 1, p. 4-5. [note: this article is a non-citable reference in a formal report].
United States Geological Survey, 1984, Syllabus for federal lands assessment (6/19/84): U.S. Geological Survey unpublished manuscript by the Branch of Oil and Gas Resources, 105 p.
United States Geological Survey, 1988, National energy resource issues Geologic perspective and the role of geologic information: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1850, 79 p.
United States Geological Survey and the Minerals Management Service, 1988, National assessment of undiscovered conventional oil and gas resources: U.S. Geological Survey and Minerals Management Service Working Paper, Open-File Report 88-373, 511 p.
University of Texas, 1979, A dictionary of petroleum terms, 2nd edition: University of Texas at Austin, Division of Continuing Education, Petroleum Extension Service, 129 p.
Uspenskii, V.A., 1962, The geochemistry of processes of primary oil migration: Geochemistry, n. 12, p. 1157-1178.
van Camp, D., 1992, Neurons for computers: Scientific American, v. 267, n.3, Sept., Special Issue, p. 170-172.
Varnes, K.L., Charpentier, R.R., and Dolton, G.L., 1982. Conditional estimates and marginal probabilities for undiscovered recoverable oil and gas resources by province Statistical background data for U.S. Geological Survey Circular 860: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-666-A, 29 p.
Varnes, K.L., and Dolton, G.L., 1982a, Estimates of federal ownership of undiscovered oil and gas resources by province: Statistical
114

background data for U.S. Geological Survey circular 860: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-666B, 14 p.
Varnes, K.L., and Dolton, G.L., 1982b, Estimated areas and volumes of sedimentary rock in the United States by province Statistical background data for U.S. Geological Survey Circular 860: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-666-C, 11 p.
Varnes, K.L., Dolton, G.L., and Charpentier, R.R., 1982, Estimates of undiscovered recoverable resources of total gas by province Statistical background data for U.S. Geological Survey Circular 860: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-666D, 17 p.
Varney, P.J. 1992, Micro methods for geologists: Reformatting data with a spreadsheet: The Computer Oriented Geological Society, COGS Letter, July/August, p. 1, 4-5.
Vassoyevich, N.B., Vysotskiy, I.V., Sokolov, B.A., and Tatarenko, Y.I., 1971, Oil-gas potential of Late Precambrian deposits: International Geology Review, v. 13, n. 3, p. 407-418.
Verly, G., David, M., Journel, A.G., and Marechal, A., editors, 1984, Geostatistics for natural resources characterization, Part 2: Boston, MA., D. Reidel Publishing Company, NATO Advanced Science Institutes Series, Series C - Mathematical and Physical Sciences Vol. 122, 1,092 p.
Vidas, E.H., and Duleep, K.G., 1984, Find-rate methodology and resource base assumptions: Washington, D.C., Gas Research Institute, contract 5082-711-0571.
Vitali, V., and Gifford, J.A., 1990, Expert systems and geoarchaeology: Geotimes, July, 1990, p. 21-22.
Vlissides, S.D., and Quirin, B.A., 1964, Oil and gas fields of the United States exclusive of Alaska and Hawaii: U.S. Geological Survey, scale 1:2,500,000, 2 sheets.
Vozoff, K., 1972, The magnetotelluric method in the exploration of sedimentary basins: Geophysics, v. 37, n. 1, p. 98-141.
Wade, W.W., and Hanley, P.T., 1980, America's energy future: Los Angeles, CA., Dames & Moore, Engineering Bulletin, n. 53, October, 4-14.
Wadge, G., 1992, Conference report: Geological applications of CIS: Computer Oriented Geological Society, COGS Letter, June, p. 5, 14.
Wadge, G., Cross, A.M., and Angelikaki, C., 1990, Semi-automatic structural mapping in arid terrain from remotely sensed images, in Remote sensing: An operational technology for the mining and petroleum industries: London, England, Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, p. 103-110.
115

Waldrop, M.M., 1989, NASA flight controllers become AI pioneers: Science, v. 244, June 2nd, p. 1,044-1045.
Walker, M.G., 1987, How feasible is automated discovery?: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Expert, v. 2, n. 1, spring 1987, p. 69-82.
Walker, M.G., 1988, Expert systems in geological exploration: Can they be cost effective?: Geobyte, v. 3, n. 3, p. 18-23.
Walker, M.G., and Blum, R.L., 1986, Towards automated discovery from clinical databases: The RADIX project: New York, NY., Elsevier, Proceedings of the Fifth World Congress on Medical Informatics, p. 32-36.
Walker, M.G., Blum, R., and Pagan, L.M., 1985, MINIMYCIN: A miniature rule-based system: M.D. Computing, v. 2, n. 4, p. 21-27, 46.
Wallich, P., 1991, Silicaon babies - Trends in artificial intelligence: Scientific American, December, p. 124-134.
Walpole, R.E., and Myers, R.H., 1978, Probability and statistics for engineers and scientists, Second Edition: New York, New York, Macmillan Publishing Company, 580 p.
Waples, D.W., 1984, Geochemistry in exploration: A new philosophy: Oil and Gas Journal, v. 82, n. 40, p. 198-202.
Waples, D.W., 1990, Maturity modeling of sedimentary basins: Approaches, limitations and prediction of future developments, in Cross, T.A., ed., Quantitative dynamic stratigraphy: Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice-Hall, Inc., p. 181-193.
Wardlaw, B.R., and Harris, A.G., and Schindler, K.S., 1983, Thermal maturation values (conodont color alteration indices) for Paleozoic rocks in Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-819, 17 p.
Wardlaw, B.R., and Harris, A.G., 1984, Conodont-based thermal maturation of Paleozoic rocks in Arizona: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 69, p. 1101-1106.
Warman, H.R., 1971, Future problems in petroleum exploration: Petroleum Review, v. 25, n. 291, March, p. 96-101.
Warnecke, L., 1990, Geographic Information Systems: Team tries to find common ground for spatial data: Government Computer News, Nov. 26th, 1990, p. 45-47.
Warner, L.A., 1980, The Colorado lineament, in Kent, H.C., and Porter, K.W., eds., Colorado geology: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists 1980 Symposium, p. 11-21.
Waterman, D.A., 1986, A guide to expert systems: Reading, MA.,
116

Addison-Vesley Publishing Company, 419 p.
Webber, C.E., 1961, Estimates of petroleum reserves discovered, in Moody, G.B., ed., Petroleum exploration handbook: New York, NY., McGraw-Hill Book Company, p. 25-1 to 25-25.
Weber, R.H., and Peirce, H.W., editors, 1962, Guidebook of the Mogollon Rim region east-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Society, 13th Field Conference, 175 p.
Weeks, L.G., 1950, Concerning estimates of potential oil reserves: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 34, p. 1947-1953.
Weeks, L.G., 1952, Factors of sedimentary basin development that control oil occurrence: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, v. 36, p. 2071-2124.
Weeks, L.G., editor, 1958a, Habitat of Oil: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Symposium, 1384 p.
Weeks, L.G., 1958b, Fuels reserves of the future: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 42, n. 2, p. 431-438.
Weeks, L.G., 1959, Where will energy come from in 2059: Petroleum Engineer, Aug., v. XXXI, n. 9.
Weeks, L.G., 1973, Accelerating demand challenges petroleum industry performance: World Oil, v. 175, n. 1, p. 42-44.
Weiss, E., 1991, Regional ground-water flow in Upper and Middle Paleozoic rocks in southeastern Utah and adjacent parts of Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico: U.S. Geological Survey, Water-Resources Investigations Report 90-4079, 57 p.
Weiss, S.M., and Kulikowski, C.A., 1984, A practical guide to designing expert systems: Totowa, NY., Rowman and Allanheld Publishers, 174 P-
Weiss, S.M., Kulikowski, C., Apte, C., Uschold, M., Patchett, J., Brigham, R., and Spitzer, B., 1982, Building expert systems for controlling complex programs: Proceedings of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence, p. 322-326.
Welte, D.H., 1972, Petroleum exploration and organic geochemistry: Journal of Geochemical Exploration, v. 1, p. 117-136.
Welte, D.H., and Yukler, M.A., 1980, Evolution of sedimentary basins from the standpoint of petroleum origin and accumulation An approach for a quantitative basin study: Organic Geochemistry, v. 2, p. 1-8.
Welte, D.H., and Yukler, M.A., 1981, Petroleum origin and accumulation in basin evolution A quantitative model: American Association
117

of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 65, p. 1387-1396.
Wenger, E., 1987, Artificial intelligence and tutoring systems - Computational and cognitive approaches to the communication of knowledge: Los Altos, CA., Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 486 p.
Wenrich, K.J., 1985, Mineralization of breccia pipes in northern Arizona: Economic Geology and Bulletin of the Society of Economic Geologists, v. 80, p. 1722-1735.
Wenrich, K.J., Billingsley, G.H., and Huntoon, P.W., 1987, Breccia pipes and geologic map of the northwestern Hualapai Indian Reservation and vicinity, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey, Open-File Report 86458-C, 32 p., scale 1:48,000.
White, D.A., 1980, Assessing oil and gas plays in facies-cycle wedges: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 64, p. 1158-1178.
White, D.A., Garrett, R.W., Jr., Marsh, G.E., Baker, R.A., and Gehman, H.M., 1975, Assessing regional oil and gas potential, in Haun, J.D., ed., Methods of estimating the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Studies in Geology No. 1, p. 143-159.
White, D.A., and Gehman, H.M., 1979, Methods of estimating oil and gas resources: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 63, p. 2183-2192.
White, L.P., 1981, A play approach to hydrocarbon resource assessment and evaluation, in Ramsey, J.B., ed., The economics of exploration for energy resources: Greenwich, CN., JAI Press, p. 51-67.
White, M.S., 1984, Technical requirements and standards for a multipurpose geographic data system: The American Cartographer, v. 11, p. 15-26.
Whitmore, F.C., Jr., 1981, Resources for the 21st Century: Summary and conclusions of the International Centennial Symposium of the U.S. Geological Survey: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 857, 41 p.
Whittaker, D., 1981, Leasing activity in Arizona: Energy Resources: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, Fieldnotes, v. 11, n. 2, p. 11.
Widrow, B., and Winter, R., 1988, Neural nets for adaptive filtering and adaptive pattern recognition: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Computer, March, p. 25-39.
Wiegand, D.L., editor, 1981, Geology of Paradox basin: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists, 1981 Field Conference, 285 p.
Wignall, T.K., and De Geoffroy, J., 1987, Statistical models for optimizing mineral exploration: New York, NY., Plenum Press Publishing
118

Company, 432 p.
Williams, C., 1984, Software tool packages the expertise needed to build expert systems: Electronic Design, August, p. 153-167.
Williams, H., 1936, Pliocene volcanoes of the Navajo-Hopi country: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 47, p. 111-171.
Wilson, E.D., 1962, A resume of the geology of Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Mines Bulletin 171, 140 p.
Wilson, E.D., and Moore, R.T., 1962, Geologic cross-sections of Arizona, #1-8: Arizona Bureau of Mines, horizonatal scale 1 inch = 3 miles, vertical scale 1 inch = 500 feet.
Wilson, E.D., Moore, R.T., and Cooper, J.R., 1969, Geologic map of Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey, scale 1:500,000.
Wilson, E.D., Moore, R.T., and O'Haire, R.T., 1960, Geologic map of Navajo and Apache Counties, Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Mines, scale 1:375,000.
Wilson, H.H., 1975, Time of hydrocarbon expulsion, paradox for geologists and geochemists: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 59, p. 69-84.
Wilson, J.E., 1973, Deep is the word for tomorrow's oil: Dallas, TX., American Petroleum Institute paper 362-G, presented at Third Annual Meeting, April 9-11, 1973, Denver, CO., 28 p.
Windley, B.F., 1982, The evolving continents, 2nd Edition: New York, NY., John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 399 p.
Winston, P.H., 1984, Artificial intelligence: Reading, MA., AddisonWesley Publishing Company.
Winston, P.H., and Brown, R.H., editors, 1979, Artificial intelligence: An MIT perspective, volume I: Expert problem solving, natural language understanding, intelligent computer coaches, and representation and learning: Cambridge, MA., The MIT Press, 492 p.
Winston, P.H., and Predergast, K.A., editors, 1984, The AI business: The commercial uses of artificial intelligence: Cambridge, MA., The MIT Press, 324 p.
Winters, S.S., 1963, Supai Formation (Permian) in eastern Arizona: Geological Society of America Memoir 89, 99 p.
Wiorkowski, J.J., 1981, Estimating volumes of remaining fossil fuel resources: Journal of American Statistical Association, v. 76, n. 375, p. 534.
Witcher, J.C., 1979, Proven potential, and inferred geothermal re-
119

sources of Arizona and their heat contents in geothermal direct heat use: Market potential/penetration analysis for Federal Region #9, in Powell, W., and Pang, K., eds., Jet Propulsion Laboratory for U.S. Department of Energy, publication #80-41, p. A-3 to A-73.
Witcher, J.C., Stone, C., and Hahman, W.R., Sr., 1982, Geothermal resources of Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology, National Oceanic and Atmospherics Administration, and U.S. Department of Energy, scale 1:500,000.
Wood, G.H., Jr., and Bour, W.V., III, 1988, Coal map of North America: U.S. Geological Survey map, 2 sheets, 44 p., scale 1:5,000,000.
Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1983, Overview of the regional geology of the Paradox basin study region, for U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Waste Isolation, ONWI-92, distribution category UC-70: San Francisco, CA., Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 433 p.
Woodward, J., Meissner, F.F., and Clayton, J.L., editors, 1984, Hydrocarbon source rocks of the greater Rocky Mountain region: Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists 1984 Symposium, 557 p.
Woodward, L.A., compiler, 1984, Tectonic map of the Rocky Mountain region of the United States, in Sloss, L.L., ed., Sedimentary cover - North American craton: U.S.: Geological Society of America, The geolog of North America, vol. D-2, 1988, plate 2, scale 1:2,500,000.
Young, A., Monaghan, P.H., and Schweisberger, R.T., 1977 Calculation of ages of hydrocarbons in oils Physical chemistry applied to petroleum geochemistry: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 61, p. 573-600.
Young, R.A., and Brennan, W.J., 1974 Peach Springs Tuff: Its bearing on structural evolution of the Colorado Plateau and development of Cenozoic drainage in Mohave County, Arizona: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 85, p. 83-90.
Young, R.A., Elston, D.P., and McKee, E.H., 1987, Laramide deformation and sedimentation in northern Arizona: Post=Turonian through Ypresian events coincident with Cordilleran fold and thrust belt chronology (abst.): Geological Society of America, Abstracts with Programs, v. 19, n. 7, p. 903.
Zapp, A.D., 1961, World petroleum resources, in Domestic and world resources of fossil fuels, radioactive minerals, and geothermal energy: Preliminary reports prepared by members of the U.S. Geological Survey for the National Resources Subcommittee of the Federal Science Council, Nov. 28th, 1961, 9 p.
Zapp, A.D., 1962, Future petroleum producing capacity of the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1142-H, 36 p.
Zhdanov, M.A., 1962, Prognostic reserves of oil and gas and problems of
120

methods of estimating them: Petroleum Geology, v. 6, p. 177-184.
Zietz, I., compiler, 1982, Composite magnetic anomaly map of the United States: U.S. Geological Survey and Society of Exploration Geophysicists, scale 1:2,500,000.
Zivy, G.M., 1984, The role of expert systems in producing log interpretation software: Expert Systems, v. 1, n. 1, July, p. 57-63.
APPENDIX A
WHAT MAKES UP AN EXPERT SYSTEM AND HOW DOES IT WORK? The following is taken from Schaub (1989).
"Expert systems are not futuristic science-fiction products that threaten to replace human workers or provide incomprehensibly complex solutions to commonsense problems. Instead, they are business tools that help to enhance the quality and availability of knowledge required by decision-making professionals in a wide range of industries.
If they are designed and implemented correctly, expert systems provide business users with high-powered complements to their conventional programs such as databases, word processors, and spreadsheet analysis.
Expert systems differ from conventional applications software in the following ways:
The sophistication of the user interface. The existence of a 'knowledge base,' or system of related concepts that enable the computer to approximate human judgment. The expert system shell, or interpreter. It's the shell that actually processes the information entered by a user, relates it to the concepts contained in the knowledge base; and provides an assessment, judgment, or solution to a particular problem or question. Note that, in principle, any conventional programming language can be used to build a knowledge base; you don't need so-called artificial intelligence languages such as Lisp or Prolog. The shell simplifies the process of creating a knowledge base.
INTERFACE DESIGNS. Traditionally, interface designs for expert systems have hinged on graphical capabilities and unconventional methods of entering data into the system. For example, many expert systems used a mouse for data entry well before the Mac became accepted in corporate America.
Graphical interfaces can supply information in any number of forms; simple text 'dressed up' in windows, pop-up menus, or actual graphical objects designed to represent things like statistical information or flow of logic.
Now, much of this style has been integrated into the conventional applications, but they're of particular use in expert systems. An expert system may express an idea, solution, or explanation using more complex conventions than rows of numbers, pie charts, or brief messages such as 'Out of space on drive B:'.
Practical examples include the drawing of a map by an expert
121

system that provides directions or geographic analysis or the expression of financial relationships through complex charts organized dynamically to emphasize a particular point.
The user interface does not intrinsically limit the capabilities of the expert system to 'reason'. It only enhances the ability of the user and computer to gain a better and more complete understanding of the assessments.
KNOWLEDGE BASE. The knowledge base is the library of 'rules' the expert system uses when making a decision or offering a solution to a problem. In general, there's a system designed specifically to manipulate information in the particular form the knowledge base has. Knowledge bases are traditionally described as large systems of 'if-then' statements, but this description is misleading.
Knowledge bases may not contain definitive rules at all but may contain many other objects: associative relationships between different concepts, statistical information about the probability of certain solutions, or simply large databases of facts that can be compared to one another based on simple conventions intrinsic to the expert system.
As an example, an expert system designed to manage portfolios would have to include both hard financial concepts and equations and softer information, such as rules of thumb concerning appropriate times to buy and sell based on the intuitive feel of a specific expert investor's reading of 'technical' trends.
The rules may categorically favor certain investments, such as high-tech firms. And the developer may have encoded some concept of legal limitations in the expert system.
CREATING THE KNOWLEDGE BASE. The way the information gets into the knowledge base is dependent on the specific expert system. Generally, it's coded by hand, like a traditional program, by 'knowledge engineers' who perform structured interviews of experts in the particular field. There are other ways emerging, too. Far from hand-coding are neural networks, which have an intrinsic capability to memorize and 'learn' from patterns reinforced by trainers/experts in a specific field.
The main purpose of the knowledge base is to provide the guts of the expert system the connections among ideas, concepts, and statistical probabilities that allow the reasoning part of the system to perform an accurate evaluation of a potential problem, asset, or investment.
SO, HOW ABOUT THE SHELL? An expert system shell provides a layer between the user interface and computer operating system to manage the input and output of data. It also manipulates the information provided by the user in conjunction with the knowledge base to arrive at a particular conclusion.
The structure of the shell is very similar to that of an interpreter or a front end to a database program but richer and more capable of taking the facts, assertions, and conditions contained in the knowledge base and applying them to the input data.
The shell is often sold as an end-product, allowing the purchaser to encode a knowledge base from scratch, the same way a user would
122

purchase a database system to store information provided by his company. On the other hand, knowledge bases can be sold as products where a shell or interpreter may be an incidental part of the package
in the same way a user might buy data, such as the complete works of William Shakespeare or a body of data relevant to the user's business. In that case, the user can immediately take advantage of the existing library of judgments provided by the system.
SYSTEM SOFTWARE: HELP OR HINDRANCE? The computer's operating system plays an important role in the implementation of an expert system. The operating system provides the basic capabilities of the machine to the expert system, including file management, some user interface support, memory management, and interfaces to other products that might want to share information that is contained in the expert system. The operating system's resources and utilities may intrinsically provide needed capabilities (for example, graphic or mouse support, database management) that, therefore, ease the need for additional programming. In some cases, the operating system may even provide conventions for interfacing the expert system to other programs.
The disadvantage of using the operating system's facilities is the limited control the developer has over the facilities and likely performance degradation. I believe, as an example, OS/2 and the Presentation Manager will provide much better interface support than DOS, with less plumbing work for the expert system developer.
USING AND MISUSING THE EXPERT SYSTEM. The purpose of the expert system is to enhance, or enable, judgment on the part of a human being, not to replace human judgment altogether. Expert systems can provide a relatively naive user with a lucid and powerful assessment of a problem where an expert is either unavailable or where it isn't practical to involve an expert in the decision.
Additionally, expert systems without being formal training systems can help users learn concepts and methods of decision analysis through the process of solving problems in conjunction with the computer, a valuable asset in any business situation. Over time, the user of a properly implemented expert system has the opportunity to absorb the expert's rules and intuitive decision-making skills."
EXPERT SYSTEMS BREED "KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERS" The following is taken from Charland (1988).
"In the mid-1970s, Boeing Aerospace found itself in a corporate predicament. Two of its leading aircraft designs were obsolescent. There was an immediate need to train young engineers in the development of new systems.
But just as the firm's designs needed updating, a number of its leading engineers were retiring. How could Boeing change its product line and personnel at the same time?
Management decided to assign each of the retiring tool-design engineers as a mentor to a young engineer. Each pair worked at a computer-aided-design station. As the senior engineers taught the novices, their design were stored in computer memory.
123

The company discovered an unforeseen benefit. Their computers had created an entire library of design information. Now they could use the expertise of their senior engineers long after the individuals had retired.
Today, the Boeing experience is commonplace in the field of expert systems. Computers are used for much more than calculating figures and storing data. They transmit the stored knowledge and problem-solving skills of expert professionals as well.
Jeff Richardson is a leader in the emerging field of expert systems. He heads the Center for Applied Artificial Intelligence at the University of Colorado's College of Business in Boulder.
Richardson sees several forms of expert systems developing, for different markets.
Many large organizations have developed computer-supported systems for internal operations such as selecting transportation systems or trouble-shooting maintenance.
The Campbell Company has an expert system for cooking soup. Other expert systems provide skills and knowledge to masses of individuals with common information needs. There is an expert system to tutor students in beginning algebra, and another to help with tax returns.
Noetics Inc. of Englewood, CO, has developed an expert system for preparing wills. Many of the most popular applications are in subspecialties of law.
Richardson finds that the most narrowly defined expert systems function best. 'You need a knowledge base that's just the same,' he says.
Reid Merrill Brunson, a Denver-based management consulting firm, is developing a system for testing job applicants in customer service and sales. The firm has 33 years accumulated data on traits and aptitudes of 14,000 sales professionals. In the past, they have shared this information through consultation and written reports. Now the computer system will make test data available to hiring managers across the country, at the touch of a button.
A third market lies in software development. A number of companies are creating Expert Systems Development Programs, or 'shells' for noncomputer specialists.
Jackie Nairn is a high-tech marketing professional who recently completed a master's thesis on expert systems. She finds two kinds of shells emerging, one for large organizations and one for specialized tasks such as tax-form preparation. 'The most successful systems are solving simple problems,' Nairn says.
The new job roles in expert systems are as varied as in other areas of computer science. They range from software developers to market support positions.
One of the key jobs is 'knowledge engineer'. That is the person who helps expert specialists communicate their knowledge to computer technicians.
Some knowledge engineers have strong technical skills themselves, such as programming in the advanced List Processor, or LISP landguage. All are conversant with the technical challenges of designing expert systems.
Knowledge engineers also must be good listeners, to pick the brains and problem-solving skills of specialists.
Richardson finds that the best people have a strong background in
124

cognitive psychology as well as computer science. They can appreciate hov human beings and computers process knowledge.
The Colorado Institute for Artificial Intelligence has additional information on jobs and training in expert systems. Its address is Campus Box 419, University of Colorado, Boulder 80309.
^Understanding Expert Systems' by Mike Van Horn is a good introductory book on the field."
HY EXPERT SYSTEMS IN PETROLEUM EXPLORATION? The following is taken from Fang, Shultz, and Chen (1986).
"The tremendous advances of the last 30 years in computer technology have evolved through four generations. The fourth generation, still active, belongs to supercomputers; however, the next, fifth-generation computers are revolutionarily different encompassing the functions of knowledge (or symbolic) processing, but not data (or numerical processing, which has been associated with all previous generations of computers).
Understandably, geologists were slow initially in making use of the computers in their work because the nature of geological research (except for a few areas such as X-ray crystallography, geostatistics, etc.) involves little if any exact computation, but instead requires interpretations based on incomplete and imprecise data. Thus, the number-crunching computers found few applications in geology. However, there has been a recent surge in the use of microcomputers, mostly for word processing and graphics applications. Those who read the AAPG Explorer (especially the July 1985 issue which also introduces expert systems) are aware of an explosive interest shown by geologists in the application of microcomputers to all phases of oil exploration.
This naturally brings up the question of what we can do with expert systems in the multifaceted endeavor of oil exploration. When reviewing the steps and phases required in oil exploration, leading to a prospect delineation, these phases may be tied into four basic questions, which must be raised in delineating favorable zones of petroleum accumulation. It is clear by now that an exploration effort may be characterized as an "expert" task because:
Many exploration phases and tasks require subjective interpretation based on incomplete and imprecise data.
The degree of confidence of an interpretation varies depending on the strength of evidence.
Direct field observations as well as indirect subsurface measurements provide only a list of probable alternatives.
Human decision is involved at nearly every step or task. Dealing with anything but facts implies uncertainty. Expert sys-
tems can make allowance for propagation of subjective certainty factors associated with such expressions as ^1 strongly believe that...', or x The field evidence suggests that...'"
125

APPENDIX B
OVERVIEW OF THE PLAY ANALYSIS RESOURCE ASSESSMENT METHOD The following is taken from White (1981).
"The exploration process is simulated through the integration of two independent models: a geology model, which is based on a probabilistic assessment of the most important geologic parameters in a province, and an exploration model, which simulates the search for oil and gas in the province. The geologic model generates a list of prospects (potential drilling targets) and a resource appraisal of the oil and gas in place using subjective probability distributions developed by experts familiar with the geology of the area. The exploration model simulates both the economic evaluation of prospects by an explorer and the drilling decision, generating a sequence of discoveries that form an inventory of pools to be evaluated for development.
These two models are integrated in a Monte Carlo simulator of exploratory activity over an extended time period. Each Monte Carlo pass begins by the geologic model sampling from probability distributions for the important geologic parameters to simulate a possible state of geologic nature for the province. This state of geologic nature is composed of a particular number of prospects, some of which are simulated as actual deposits of oil and gas and some as dry. After simulating their expected size, these prospects are ranked according to expected volume to form a simulated target list for the discovery process.
The discovery process is then represented, on a year-by-year basis, as the sequential evaluation of prospects on the target list. The status of the prospects (as either having a deposit or being dry) is unknown to the simulated explorer. If the expected economic value of a particular prospect justifies drilling an exploratory well, the simulated decision is to test it and determine whether it contains hydrocarbons. This procedure continues each year in the Monte Carlo pass or until all prospects have been tested. The learning process in exploration is simulated by using the drilling results each year to update the simulated explorer's perceived state of geologic nature. The output of the exploration model each year is a list of dry wells and discovered deposits of oil and gas. The discovered deposits are added to an inventory of pools to be considered for development. A large number of Monte Carlo passes are made to generate frequency distributions for the important output variables, such as total oil and gas resources in place, discovered reserves, and production."
126

