UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ULTERIOR
. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
GROUND-WATER RECONNAISSANCE IN THE WESTERN PART OF THE MOJAVE DESERT, CALIFORNIA, WITH PARTICULAR
RESPECT.TO THE BORON CONTENT OF WELL WATER " By / R. S. Stone
Open-file report. Not reviewed for conformance with standards and nomenclature of the Geological Survey
Long Beach, California 1957

COETEET3

and conclusions

Page -6

Introduction

*8

Location of the area

8

Purpose and scope of the investigation

11

Field methods

13

Inventory of veils and springs

13

Collection of water samples for chemical analysis

Collection of basic data

.-

-

1^ :- 16

Acknovledgnents

- 17

Well-numbering system

18

ISunerieal .and graphic^, expression of water analyses Determined constituents

.20 20

Extension of partial analyses

22

Conversion of parts per million to percentage reacting values

' 2k

Plotting analyses on the water-analysis diagram Utility of the water-analysis diagram

28 31

Boron factor -

33

Chemical symbols used on maps

35

Description of ground-water areas -

$6

Boron area of Antelope Valley

37

Geology and physiography

-

37

Occurrence and movement of ground water Chemic'al character of ground water

38 40

Contents Continued.

Description of ground-water areas continued Kcehn Lake area of Frernont Valley

Geology and physiography

Occurrence and movement of ground -water Chemical character of ground water

Middle Mojave Valley

-:

Geology and physiography

<

Occurrence and movement of ground water

0%$? chemical character of ground water '

^

' ...

.'

- Harper Valley .

>-

~

i Geology and physiography Occurrence and movement of ground water
Chemical character of ground water

Cuddeback Valley

.

Superior Valley

References

-. ...

Page
^5 k-5 h6 ^8 52 52 53 55 - 57 57 58 60 62 6k ' 66

ILLUSTRATIONS
_____

Page

Plate 1.- Kap shoving topographic basins and. areas ctudied -

8

2.- Water-analysis diagram shoving chemical character of four California waters shown in table 2, and
position of chemicals-character symbols used on plates k, 9, and 12 *

23

' 3»- Map of the western part of the Mojave Desert,

CalifGsaia:, shoving geology, locations of

wells, water-level contours yand altitudes

of water surface in 1953-51*-

-

/ r-----r- 11 (

- Map of the vestern part of the Mojave Desert,

California, shoving chemical character of

ground water

.

; 5» water-analysis diagram shoving chemical
character of 15 selected vaters from the Boron area of .Antelope Valley

6.- Water-level profile of the Koehn Lake area, 1953-5^

7*- Water-analysis diagram showing chemical character .cf 2o selected waters from Fremont Valley

>- f.3ap cf Harper Valley and part of the Middle Ifojave
Valley, California, showing geology, locations
of wells, water-level contours and altitudes cf water surface in 1953-5^

9.- Map of Harper Valley and part of the Kiddle
Mo^ave Valley, California, showing the chemical character of ground water

/10.- Water-analysis diagram showing chemical character
of 2k selected waters from the Middle Mcgave Valley

/!! - Water-analysis diagram showing chemical character of 17 selected waters from Harper Valley

<L2.- Geologic, hydrologic, and geochemical map of Cuddeback and Superior Valleys 1953-5^

y!3«- Water-analysis diagram showing chemical character of k selected waters from Cuddeback Valley and 1 selected water from Superior Valley

( 7- 11
11
11
11 11 11 11 11 11

1. Illustrations are at end of report.

TABLES ____

Page

Table 1.- Factors for converting parts per million to equivalents per million -

2.- Analyses of selected California waters

3«- Description of water wells in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif, i

Antelope Valley

-

Fremont Valley -»

Middle Mojave Valley

Harper Valley

.

Cuddeback Valley
*
Superior Valley

--

-

** *- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert -

Antelope Valley

«

Fremont Valley - -

.Middle Mojave Valley -

Harper Valley >*

Cuddeback and Superior Valleys -

26 - 29
67 - 68 - 70
7^. - - 80 - . 83
&%
85 85 « 89 '9^- 99 102

GROUND-WATER RECONNAISSANCE IN THE WESTERN PART OF THE MOJAVE DESERT, CALIFORNIA, WITH PARTICULAR
RESPECT TO THE BORON CONTENT OF WELL WATER
By R. S. Stone
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Reconnaissance geochemical studies of ground waters in the western part of the Mojave Desert indicate two areas that show a possibility of containing economic deposits of borates. These areas were determined by the abnormally high boron factors of the ground waters when compared to the boron factors of waters sampled* throughout the area*
Ground water analyzed from well 30/3T-12N1 in Red Rock Canyon showed a boron concentration of 33 ppsi and a boron factor of 10. Detailed geochemical prospecting would be desirable in the large exposed section of the Tertiary rocks in Red Rock Canyon area to investigate the source of mineralization to the ground water.
Analyses of ground water from wells 11/6-20A1 and 17L1 about 7 miles east of the Kramer borate deposit show a boron concentration and factor as high as 35 ppm and 23, respectively. Colernanite has been reported from test holes drilled in this area. Well 11/6-20A1 was drilled to a depth of 712 feet, but an accurate log of the well was not available.

6

In general the "boron concentrations and factors of ground and surface waters throughout ithis part of the western Mojave Desert area are less than 1.0 ppm and 1.0, respectively. A few factors were as high as 3-0, but this is not considered a significant factor for this area.
Caution should always "be used in the geochemical interpretation of ground waters as a guide to the location of mineral deposits. Low concentrations or absence of the desired mineral constituent in ground water does not necessarily indicate the nonoccurrence of the mineral. Hydrologic conditions can be such that the mineral "deposit does not affect to any appreciable degree the chemical character of the water tapped by a well. For example, above the Kramer borate deposit a srcall quantity of ground water of low boron concentration occurs as perched water. Therefore if water wells are not drilled to a great enough depth to tap the main ground-water body in which the unique mineral is concentrated, the analyses of the water may be valueless as a geochemical guide.
In those areas where concentrations of the desired mineral appear to be high, no valid conclusion can be made until the entire groundwater basin is hydrologically and geocheinically studied to show that a unique water occurs which could possibly be accounted, for by a unique mineral source.

INTRODUCTION

8

Location of the Area

The area of this reconnaissance investigation is in the western

part of the Mo^araJDesert (pi. l) between 117°00 l and llS^O* west ., r '

longitude and between 3b0k5* and 35°30l north latitude. It embraces

parts of six topographic basins as defined by Thompson (1929), namely:

*v

V

v/ »/

Antelope, Freaont, Middle Mcgave, Harper, Cuddeback (also known as

V
Golden), and Superior Valleys. In general the area lies north of

a line from Barstov, to Hodge, to Kramer, to Mojave; east and south of

the Gariock-£L Paso fault zone; and west of a line trending north

from Barstov.,

This area is shown on the following topographic quadrangle maps >

Searles Lake (scale 1:250,000); Barstow and Mojave (scale 1:125,000);

Cross Mountain, Saltdale, Randsburg, Mojave, and Castle Butte (scale

1:62,500); and Mojave, Piano, Desert Butte, Castle Butte SE, Johannesburg

SW, Kramer Borate District (scale 1:2^,000), and Cuddeback Lake and

Pilot Knob (preliminary, scale 1:38,000).

The outlines of the valleys investigated are shown on plate 1 and

have been somewhat modified after Thompson (1929) en the basis of

larger^scale topographic maps having contour intervals of 50 or 25 if
feet Instead of the 100-foot interval of the Searles Lake quadrangle

(scale 1:250,000) available to Thompson. In general it is convenient

to consider these valleys as separate areas; although, as will be

explainod later, watersheds or topographic divides do not everywhere

coincide with ground-water divides, and at some places ground water moves

from one ground-water basin to another beneath topographic divides.

Antelope Valley, which is in the southwest corner of the Mojave Desert, is bordered on the west by the Tehachapi Mountains; on the north and east by a disconnected chain of irregular low hills; and on the south by the San Gabriel Mountains, which are outside the area studied and are not shown on plate 1. Although, Thompson (1929) shows the northern boundary of the Antelope Valley a few miles north of Rogers Xake, which is a large playa in the lowest part of the valley, there is a large area bounded on the north by the Rand Mountains and to the west and east by relatively low hills, *n of which drains' into Rogers Late* and 'may; thus t be considered a part of the valley* The area north, of U. S. Highway k66 is herein referred to as the Boron area and is the only part of Antelope Valley studied in the present investigation. The Kramer borate deposits lie in the southwestern part- of the Boron area, and the ground-water study was begun in this area.
Freaont Valley, the northwesternznost valley studied, is bounded on the north by the El Paso Mountains, on the northwest by the southern end of the Sierra Nevada, on the east by the Rand Mountains, and on the south and southeast by Antelope Valley. 3foe southern boundary of the area has been modified after Thompson (1929)* Thompson included most of the Boron area in the Fremont Valley^ whereas, in fact, the surface drainage in this area is a part of Antelope Valley.

10
The Middle Mojave Valley of this report includes that part of the Mojave River between Hodge and Barstow. Also included is the area south and southeast of the Kraraer Hills and the area southeast of Lenwood. The reach of the Middle J-tojave Valley of Thompson (1929) between Hodge and Victorville was not included in this study.
Harper Valley, which is about 15 miles west of Barstow, lies Immediately east of the Boron area and is adjoined on the south by the Middle Mojsve Valley* The south and southeast boundaries of the valley are not well defined, particularly in the vicinity of Hinkley where the boundary was drawn somewhat arbitrarily because, during periods of floods, the Mojave River has discharged into Harper Lake; also, ground water moves northward from the Middle Mojave Valley to Harper Valley >
Cuddeback Valley is a relatively small well-defined valley southeast of Randsburg, north of Harper Valley, and west of Superior Valley. This valley was termed Golden Valley by Thompson (1929) "but current usage favors Cuddeback because of the same name applied to the dry lake in the central part of the valley.
Superior Valley lies immediately east of Cuddeback Valley, north and northeast of Harper Valley, and west of Coyote Valley (not shown on the maps). It is somewhat larger than Cuddeback Valley.

Porpose and Scope of the Investigation
In the autumn of 1952'the Mineral Deposits Branch of the United States Geological Survey, in connection with its work on the Mojave Desert project, requested the Ground Water 'Branch of the Geological Survey to undertake a reconnaissance ground-water investigation of the western, part of the Mojave Desert. The principal purpose of the ground-water study was to determine, in areas of Tertiary deposits containing known or suspected borateores, whether study of the chemical . character of ground waters or other ground-water techniques could be used as a guide in the location of subsurface borate deposits."
Accordingly, the work was directed toward: (l) The collection of available chemical analyses from public agencies and other sources as well as the sanroling of wells and springs in the field for chemical analysis- The data were plotted on maps and chemical diagrams, andwere studied with particular respect to the "boron concentration, as shown on plates h>, 5, 7, and 9 "t° 13* (2) the canvassing of most of the wells in the area not only to collect samples but also to determine the altitude of the. ground-water'levels, which were used to construct the water-level contours shown on plates 3 and 8 to provide information, on the direction of ground-water movement through or within the several valleys. These water-level data also provided information on the existence of subsurface barriers, usually fault barriers, which impede ground-water movement; and (3) the collection of available well logs which were used to study the character of the water-bearing deposits in areas where ground waters contained above-average concentrations of boron. The water-bearing deposits as exposed at the surface had already been mapped by the Mineral Deposits Branch. The results of the geologic mapping, modified by the author, in the light of subsurface * information, are shown on plates 3> 8> and 12.

The investigation was "begun in January 1953 i& "the area of the known Kraner borate deposits near Boron, California, in order to determine the occurrence and chemical quality of ground waters where the occurrence and extent of commercial borate deposits were known in considerable detail. Subsequently, the study was expanded to include adjacent areas in the northern parts of Fremont and Antelope Valleys. This phase of the investigation was completed in July 1953 > aod a progress report was prepared for administrative use. Thereafter, the area of investigation was expanded to include additional areas in the Middle Mojave, Harper, Cuddeback, and Superior Valleys.
During the period April to July 1953> F. H. Olmsted, geologist, Ground Water Branch, was assigned to the project to direct the work and the preparation of the progress report mentioned. The author of the present report terminated his employment with the Geological Survey in December 195^> before completing the report. Fred Kunkel, geologist, Ground"Water Branch, completed the report for public release..
The ground-water reconnaissance h.?.s been carried on by the Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior, under the general supervision of J. F. Poland, district geologist of the Ground Water Branch in charge of ground-water investigations in California, and under the immediate supervision of G. F. Worts, Jr., geologist in charge of the Long Beach area office. Ward Smith, geologist in charge of the Mojave Desert project of the Mineral Deposits Branch, directed the broad phases of the work insofar as it is related to the overall program.

13
Field Methods
Inventory of Wells and Springs
The first step in this investigation was an inventory of water wells and springs in each of the six valleys' (pi. l) to obtain the following datat (l) Location of well or spring by odometer traverse or compass bearing; (2) physical description of well or spring; (3) determ1n«tiac of land-surface altitude at well or spring by barometer or interpolation from topographic map; (k) depth of well by measurement or owner*s report; (5) depth to water by measurement or from owner*s report, if measurement weare* impossible; (6) rate
Zf~&
of discharge c£ pumped well, flowing well, or spring; A(?) driller's log^ casing stse and perforations, chemical analyses, previous waterlevel neasursaexrts, and other available data,
These- dafea were listed on standard Geological Survey forms and GJ10 a part of the -permanent file in the Long Beach office
of the Grocad ^Tater Branch, where they wall-fee available for inspection. A total of about 570 wells were canvassed throughout the six areas, of which 160 wells were canvassed by personnel of the Long Beach office* There are about 270 wells in the Boron and Kbean Lake areas and about 300 wells in the Harper, Middle Mojave, Cuddeback, and Superior Valleys.

Collection of Water Samples for Chemical
Water samples were collected directly from pumped and flowing wells and springs, and bailed from unused wells. Approximately 50 samples were collected throughout the six basins to give a "broad areal coverage. The collection of water samples, however, was unavoidably limited by the distribution of wells and springs and resulted in. an incomplete areal coverage. Nevertheless, an effort
i was made to collect samples in those areas known or believed to be underlain by sediments and volcanics of Tertiary age.
Where "possible, samples from pumped wells were collected directly from the end of the discharge pipe, thereby avoiding- possible contamination and concentration which can occur in storage and reservoir tanks. The temperature of the water, an estimate of -the flow in gallons per minute, and the length of time the well was pumped before sampling were recorded when a well was sampled. The temperature, flow, and type of discharge were also noted when sampling s'prings and flowing wells. In addition to these data, the depth of the well, perforated intervals, and logs were recorded whenever this information was available.
Samples were bailed from unused wells having open unobstructed casiags or from wells which could be made accessible. On the bailing of water samples, the volume of water bailed, drawdown, and recovery rates of the water level were noted. This information was used to determine whether the well was plugged or if there was free access for water to move through the perforations.

The equipment used for bailing included a detachable steel tripod Counted on the front end of a jeep pickup, a 1|~inch sheave affixed to the top of the tripod, and 600 feet of 2,000-pound-test aircraft cable mounted on the front winch of 'the jeep. Two bailers, one 8-inch O.D. by 5 feet and the other Winch O.D. by 5 feet, holding 12 and 3 gallons respectively, were constructed* The power for lowering and lifting the bailers was supplied by the jeep through the front power takeoff. It was estimated that from a well with an average depth to water of 200 feet, 100 to 120 gallons per hour could be bailed with the 8-inch bailer.

16
Collection of Basic Data
Considerable tine was spent contacting public and private agencies
/ >to obtain copies of well logs, water-level records, and chemical analyses.
Soce data were obtained from the/ Ground Water Branch] office jin Long Beach, Calif., which has been conducting a ground-water investigation in parts of .Antelope and Fremont .Valleys and canvassing wells in Harper Valley.
A total of approximately 2,000 logs of wells and chemical analyses were collected throughout the Mojave Desert and adjacent areas. Of these,
*about 200 oil and, water well logs were collected for the six areas, and
A
80 have been field located. In addition, approximately 80 analyses of surface and ground waters were collected, and the field locations of ifO sampling points were established. Other agencies from which data were collected are as follows: California Division of Water Resources; California Division of Oil and Gas; San Bernardlno County Flood Control District; U» S. Department of Agriculture, Salinity Laboratory, Riverside, Califorate U» S. Bureau of Reclamation, Boulder City, Nevada; Union
i Pacific Railroad; Atchison, Topekay ond Santa Fe Railroad; Los Angeles Metropolitan Water District; and U. S. Geological Survey, Surface Water Branch, San Bernardino, California. In addition, data were obtained from private land owners, well drillers, and power companies. Most of these data were collected by means of a portable raicrofilmer.

Acknovled gme at s
Max Bookman, Engineer in Charge of the Los Angeles office of the California Division of Water Resources, Glenn Brown, assistant engineering geologist, and other personnel made available well logs, chemical analyses, and other data in the Mojave Desert area. Lloyd Martin of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District made available chemical analyses for-that part of the Mojave Desert within the boundaries of San Bernardino County. L. V. Wilcox, U. S. Department of Agriculture Salinity Laboratory, Riverside, Calif., supplied copies of analyses for Indian Wells Valley, Death Valley, and Amargosa River area and for other areas ±n Los Angeles, Kern, and San Bernardino Counties in the Mojave Desert area. Glenn Lang of the U. S. Geological Survey, San Beraardina, Calif,, supplied information on water supplies in the Mojave River valley.
S. Harris of East Barstow, W. Sc/oggin^ of Helendale, and H. Le/ of Oral Granae, well drillers, supplied well logs and other information . on ground water in the western'part of the Mojave Desert. J. Smith, California Electric and Power Co., Barstow, and the personnel of the Randsburg office furnished well and pump-test data.

18

Well-limbering System

i

The well-numbering system used by the Geological Sorvey in California

shovs the location of wells and springs according to the rectangular

system for the subdivision of public land. For example, in the number

30/37-2^R3, which was assigned to a well near Cantil in the Koehn Lake

area, the part of the number preceding the bar indicates the township

(T. 30 S.), the part between the bar and the hyphen shows the range

(R. 37 E.), the digits between the hyphen and the letter indicate the

section (sec* 2^), and. the letter indicates the ^0-acre subdivision of

the section as shown in the accompanying diagram:

DCBA
* *» ta«
E FGH -21*
ML KJ NP QR
Within each *U)-acre tract, the wells and springs are numbered serially, as indicated by the final digit of the number. Thus, well 30/37-2ifR3 is the third well to be listed in the SE^SE-J- sec. 2k, T. 30 S., R. 37 E., Mount Diablo base and meridian lines.
Although that part of the area about north of the town of Mojave is covered by the Mt. Diablo base and meridian lines and that part to the south by the San Bernardino base and meridian lines, no duplication in township and range numbers results: The Mt. Diablo numbers are from T. 29 S. to T. 32 S. and from R. 36 E. to R. Vf E.; the San Bernardino numbers are from T. 8 N. to T. 12 N. and from R. 2 W. to R. 11 W.

19

As all of the veils are either in the northwest quadrant of the

San Bamardino base and meridian lines or in the southeast quadrant

of the Mt. Diablo base and meridian lines, the abbreviation of the

township and range part of the numbers is sufficient.

The well-numbering system is commonly used as a shorthand means

of describing locations of features other than wells and springs. For

example, one oT the adits of the Yellow Aster Mine near Randsburg can

be described as being located in 30AO-2D. This would indicate a

location within the 1JW£F*J- sec. 2, T.- 30 S., R._ ^0 E., Mb. Diablo

base and meridian lines. These locations are not indicated on .the maps.

Special cases arise where the above described well-numbering system

is altered. The following are examples of the altered well numbers used

in this report:

.

.

A) A weli located in the field where the section-net control

is poor, is denoted by the letter X in place of the ^0-acre

-»

^

tract letter. Well 10/5-32X1 Is an example of this type of

number, and the well would be plotted on a map as XI.

B) A well not located in the field but which has a reported

location is denoted by a dash in place of the 40-acre

tract letter. Wells 10/5-32-1 and 10/5-32-2 are examples

of this type of number and they would be plotted on a

map as -1 and -2, respectively.

20
NUMERICAL AM) GRAPHIC EXPRESSION OF WATER ANALYSES
Because chemical analyses of waters commonly are expressed in parts per million (ppin), the purpose of this section is to set forth the information needed to convert analyses in parts per million to the form used for graphic plotting, with special reference to the trilinear water-analyses diagram described by Piper (19^5)- The material here presented is in part a duplication of information given by Piper, but has been done to present a step-by-step instruction on how to proceed from the analysis to the plotted graph.
Determined Constituents
H ^^MMMaHMMMM^MMMMMVHHMHBM-HBI^WBMMBMM^MMMBBMMWHV
In general, natural waters contain only a few dissolved constituents, most of them in the form of cations or anions, but some in the ,form .of un-ionized compounds. The principal cations are calcium, magnesium, and sodium, potassium being minor; the principal anions are bicarbonate, sulfate, and chloride, carbonate (if present at all), nitrate, boron, and fluoride being present in minor amounts (table 2). Un-ioniaed silica usually is present in colloidal form, and iron usually is present but commonly in a concentration of less than 1 ppni. Additional minor and rarer constituents are listed by Piper (1953> P« 3)»
-The usual complete analysis made by the Geological Survey includes determination of all the constituents listed in the preceding paragraph and, in addition, dissolved solids, determined by evaporation to dryness, and specific conductance (micromhos at 25 C). Hardness is expressed as calcium carbonate and generally differentiated into carbonate and noncarbonate hardness.

In many analyses dissolved solids are not determined, and specific conductance may not be available. In these analyses, if the six principal ionized constituents have, been determined analytically, a susznation of these constituents usually gives an approximate value fcr the total dissolved solids. However, in the summation of these constituents, expressed in parts per million, the carbonate equivalent of the bicarbonate concentration is used. This procedure, as described by Collins (1923, p. 253), is followed to conform with the value obtained for dissolved solids by the evaporation process. In the process of evaporation of natural water to dryness bicarbonate decomposes to an equivalent amount of carbonate owing to the loss of carbon dioxide and water, in the ratio of 6l parts by weight of bicarbonate to 30 parts by weight of carbonate. The carbonate equivalent is obtained by dividing the bicarbonate concentration, expressed in parts per million, by 2.03. For example:
6l ppni HCCU1 = 30 ppm C03
2.03

22
Extension of Partial Analyses
In many partial analyses the chloride, sulfate, and "bicarbonate concentrations are determined by standard laboratory techniques. However, if sulfate is determined by the turbidity method and hardness by the soap method, their r^w&***ire values should be considered approximate.
Often in partial analyses sodium is not determined, and calcium and magnesium are determined only as total hardness in parts per million
/ 'calcium carbonate. In this type of partial analysis, if the principal aniona were determined accurately, the approximate concentration of sodium, in equivalents per million (epm), can be determined by difference as follows:
Total hardness m ^ Qf ^ + ( } 50
Approximate Na (epm) « Sum of anions (epm) - sum of Ca + Mg (epm)
In some partial analyses total hardness is broken down into Ca and Mg hardness. In this case the equivalents per million of. both Ca and Mg can be calculated by the same equation as follows:
Ca hardness (ppm) = ^ {epia) 50
Mq hardness (ppm) = ^ (epm) 50
\

23
For plotting on the diamond field of the water-analysis diagram (pi. 2) discussed in the following sections, the minimum partial analysis required would include determination of total hardness, sodium, bicarbonate, and carbonate. For plotting on the cation and anion triangles as well, calcium would have to be determined in addition to hardness, which would give magnesium by difference, and either chloride or sulfate among the anions would have to be determined; or else five of the six principal ions would have to be determined directly. However, this method of analysis is only approximate and in. some cases -may lead to substantial error. It is recommended only where the more complete analyses are impractical.

Conversion of Parts Per Million to Percentage Raacting Values
The first step prior to plotting an analysis on the water-analysis
diagram is to convert the constituents expressed as parts per million (ppm) to equivalents per million (epm), and then to determine the percentage reacting values ($RV) of the Individual constituents.
The analysis as expressed in parts per million (ppm) gives a weight
relationship (the number of unit weights of the constituent in a million unit weights of water) and does not demonstrate the proportions of the constituents*. In order to obtain a more useful statement of the chemical
character, the various constituents expressed as parts per million are converted to equivalents per million (epm). This conversion can be accocnxLished in two ways: First, by dividing the parts per million of
ll the CGBStituent by the equivalent weight (combining weigjht) of the
constituent; second, by obtaining the reciprocal of the equivalent weight of the constituent and multiplying this value by the reported parts per million of the constituent. These methods are shown in the
following equations:
Parts per nilllon of constituent m e(raivalerrts ^ mirLlon equivalent weight of constituent 2
or (Parts per million) x (equivalent weight) " |^ivalents Per ""
1. The equivalent weight of an element or radical is that weight which will combine chemically with the hydrogen ior^ whose valence and atomic weight are taken as a standard of one. in order to determine the equivalent weight, the atomic weight, if the constituent is an element such as sodium, or the molecular weight, if the constituent is a radical such as sulfate, is divided by the valence of the respective element or radical.

It can be seen from the above equations that, for analyses in which the constituents are reported as equivalents per million, a conversion to parts per nil lion, if desired, can be readily accomplished as follows:
(Eouivalents per million) x (equivalent weight) = parts per million ^ -^ .
Table 1 shows the atomic and molecular weights, the equivalent weights, and "the reciprocal^of the equivalent weights of the common and some of the minor constituents of natural waters (the ions included
-r- :- ,. - o in-the usual (Geological Survey; complete-analysis^).

26

Table 1.- Factors for converting parts per million to equivalents per million

Constituent

Atomic or molecular weight

Equivalent weight

Reciprocal of
equivalent weiffht

Cations

Calcium Magnesium Sodium Potassium

(Ca)
(MS)
(l?a)
(K)

1*0.08 2^.32 23-00 39.10

20.C& 12.16 23.00 39.10

.0822 01*35 .0256

. Anions
Carbonate Bicarbonate Sulfate Chloride
Fluoride Nitrate Boron

(CO,) (HCd,) (SOLI (Cl)
<(BH)O,3)

60.02 61.02 96.06
35.1*6
19.00 62.01 . 10.82

30.01 61.02 1*8.03 35.M5
19.00 62.01 3-61

.0333 .0161* .0208 .0282
.0526 .0161 .2770

27

In a natural water the total equivalents of cations should equal

the total of the anions. Therefore, the sum of the equivalents per

million of cations and anions for an analysis affords a ready means

of checking the accuracy of the analytical wprk^ unless one of the

ions has been calculated by difference. The -QmA£fay of Water HumA

considers a 2-percent unbalance in sum of cations versus anions as the

/*3-jgfe&-og--peansia alblo/ error in an analysis of natural water. I
A third method of expressing the chemical analysis of a natural

/

water is the percentage reacting value ($RV) of the various constituents.

This value is calculated from the equivalents per million and is the

ratio of the individual, cation (or anion) to the sum of all the cations

(or enlcos) expressed as a percentage. For example:

\_____Equivalents per million of Ka_____ jua of equivalents per mill ion of the cations

, Q~ _""

v~

^Tiiivalents per million of HCO^___ sum of equivalents per million of the anions

The percentage reacting values so determined for each cation and anion are plotted on the water-analysis diagram.
Any unbalance in the analysis is adjusted automatically during the calculation of percentage reacting values by dfataininc: the percentage relationship of the individual cations or anions in equivalents per million to the sum of all the cations f(ar anions)'. By this means, the sum of percentage reacting values of the cations and anions each will equal 100 percent*

28

Plctting Analyses on the Water-Analysis Diagram

The mechanics of plotting the percentage reacting values on the

water-analysis diagram are relatively simple- and can be done in several

ways* Table 2 shews four complete analyses in »n three forms of

expression. The percentage reacting values of the constituents in

these analyses are plotted on plate 2, a water-analysis diagram. The

diagram has three separate fields for plotting, two triangles at the

lower left and Icwer right, respectively, and an intervening diamond-

shaped field, The percentage scales in all three fields read from

zero to 100 percent,. $fcfcfc the fields being marked off in divisions

of ercent .

v

In plotting the percentage reacting values, the minor constituents

are grcuped with, the major ions to which they are related. For example,

potassium is grouped with sodium, carbonate (and boron, if present as

tetraborate) with bicarbonate, and fluoride and nitrate with chloride.

The cations, calcium, magnesium, and sodium plus potassium^ are

plotted in the triangle to the lower left, and the anions, bicarbonate

plus carbonate, sulfate, and chloride .are plotted in the triangle to the

lower right. These plots show the relative proportions of the principal

constituents of natural water on the basis of the percentage reacting

values. The intervening diamond-shaped field shows the general chemical

character of the water. The arrows along the. sides of the three fields

point to the direction of 100 percent of the cation or anion indicated

by the chemical symbol accompanying the arrow. Thus, each of the vertices

in the triangular fields is a 100-percent point for one of the respective

cations or anions and the opposite side of the triangle is the zero base.

29

Table 2.- Analyses of selected California waters

/Analyses by ^

Geological

Analyses
Constituents in
Ca
Mg Na
K Total
jdations

1/

2

3

k

^} PPm epm

ppm epm $rv ppm epm $rv ppm epm ^rv

^t

£%^

^£

^.0 0.200 53.3 175 8.73 2?A 303 15.12 20.6 ^.5 0.225. 5.5

1.2 0.099 26.il. 192 15.79 !*9.5 39 3.21 ±A *5 .0^1 1.0

1.4 0,061 16.3 168 7.31 22.9 1,260 5^.8 lk.6 8T 3.783 92.ii

jrf.6 0.015 t.o /
0.375 100.0

2..S 0.07 0.2
31-90 100.0

13 0.33 o.k 1-7 .(&3 1.1

73-^6 100.0

^.092 100.1

COt; 0 ' o.o

0

0

79.3HC03
SOl^

19
'a.o

0.311'
0»Qk2

212 3.Vf 10.7 1,260 26.23

10.7 81.3

126 2.06 2.7 200 3.278 78.6 398 8.29 11.0 1.1* .029 0.7

d
F
K03
Total /Xnions

1.2 0.03^
(^.1 0.005 /
O./ 0.000

8.7 1*3

0.392 100.0

58 1.61* 5-1 2,310 65.2 86.2 29 .818 19.^

0 0.2 0.01 0.0

59 0.95 -£^ 5* 0.09 0.1

32.29 100.0

75.65 100.0

.5 .026 0.^ 1.1* .023 0.5
urfr 100.C

SiOg 8A

1*6 & 19

Pe d.o

Boron

/?Coi

Sum 28

SSmipi^cerfcpS.apnrch*oo*ns d.
ciU C.^ V/l

35.2

Percent sodium 16

1.1^ 2,070 2,1*50
23

i lAO
l*,i*50
7,5^0
75

.<*
22l*
92

30
'The percentage reacting values of the cations and anions can be plotted as a point in their respective triangles. This gives one point in each triangle. Projection of these points into the diamond-shaped field gives a point, at the intersection of the projections,, that characterizes the water as a whole. The independent plotting of a point in the diamond field gives a check on the accuracy of the triple plot, for ±f the intersection of projections drawn from the points in the triangular fields coincides with the independent point plot in the diamond field, the plot is correct.
The point plot on the water-analysis diagram does not indicate the concentration of dissolved solids. If it is desired to compare several waters for concentration as well as general character, the concentration say oe indicated by drawing a circle centered at the proper point on the diamond field, having an area or a diameter in proportion, direct or logarithmic, to the concentration. In this report such a comparison has not "been made.
For office-study purposes all analyses shown on plates 5, 7> 10, 11, and 13 were plotted on the cation and anion triangles as well as on the central diamond, which only is shown. The anion and cation plots did not indicate any peculiar characteristics arid therefore were not included.

31

Utility of the Water-Analysis Diagram

water-analysis diagram has proved to be a useful aid in the

study of the chemical character of natural waters. Itoaerous natural chemical changes, which surface and especially ground waters undergo,

can be visually and graphically demonstrated by means of this diagram.

- J)^>tx-

_

Bes^scexchange, iso*1 ^1 mii^Bf^rt.iajy 1^rm*fc#~<?^4oB- ^ghtVBge^ sulfate reduction,

and the inpainaent or improvement of water quality by the mixing of

waters are some of the geochemical phenomena whteh can be shown on the

diagram* Generally, however, plots of natural waters, contaminated

waters of increasing concentrations, and of possible contaminants do

not of themselves demonstrate the source of contamination, chiefly

because l&jlion exchange diverts the plot of contaminated waters from the "blend-lines" between plots of natural water and-possible contaminants* The diamond-shaped field of the diagram (pi. 2) can be. subdivided into several distinct fields in which waters of a particular chemical

character fall (Piper and Garrett, 1953, P» 1*0 These fields (pi. 2) are as follows: (A) Alkalies and strong acids dominant*(primary salinitro (B) noncarbonate hardnessJ alkaline earths and strong acids dominant/ /secondary salinit^; (C) carbonate alkali; weak acids and alkalies dominant/

(primary alkaliniti; (D) carbonate hardness/ alkaline earths and weak

acids dominant; /secondary-saiinity; (E) alkalinity or salinity not

dominant. One of the main purposes of the water-analysis diagram is to show-

the different types of water in an area, and this it does most success-
fully. However, many problems concerning the chemical character of water v^ufcy b\
cannot be solved using the diagram, and any conclusions ^should be carefully

drawn ^*jt=fefe^a&£^^

In this report, terms describing the general chemical character of -.raters that are of primary or secondary salinity or of primary or " secondary alkalinity are used in particular senses, as in the following exarrples: (l) "calcium chloride designates a -water in wrhich the calcium amounts to 50 percent or more of the bases and chloride to 50 percent or more of the acids*in chemical equivalents; (2) "sodium sulfate chloride" designates a -water in which the sodium amounts to 50 percent or more' of the bases in ch>emical equivalents, and the sulfate and chloride are
^H-X^VW
the frro major sasads but neither one exceeds 50 percent in chemical equivalents. Waters that are not dominantly alkaline or saline (Piper and Garrett, 1953 > P- 1*0 are not identified as a specific type. (See pi. a)

33
Boron Factor
In studying the boron concentrations in the ground waters of the western part of the Mojave Desert, it was found that, when considering the economic concentrations of boron, the "boron factor" as used by J. A. Logan (personal communication, 1953) was more significant than the boron concentration alone. The boron factor is derived from the relation of boron in parts per million to aa adjusted value of the specific conductance. The value of specific conductance in znicromhos, which is K x 10 at 25°C, is adjusted to K x 10^ at 25°C. Therefore, a water containing 1 ppm of boron and a specific conductance 1,000 micronhos would have an adjusted specific conductance of 1 and a boron factor of 1, as follows:
Boron factor = Boron (ppm) = 1 . ± . K x 10^ 'I
This relationship of the boron concentration to the adjusted specific conductance allows a more critical evaluation of the significance of the boron concentration when the economic potential is being considered. The majority of the samples collected in the areas studied show a boron factor of 1 or less. A considerable number range from 1 to 2.5 and a few show significant boron factors of 10 or higher.
The following comparison of several analyses is made in order to demonstrate the significance of the boron factor over the absolute concentration of boron in the ground water. A water from well 30/33-2i*.pl
S~S In the Koehn Lake area showed a boron concentration of ^r ppm, which is approximately 50 times greater than the average boron concentration throughout the several areas. However, the specific conductance of this water is on the order of 20,000 micromhos, which is approximately

35 times greater than the average specific conductance. Thus, the boron factor for the water from this veil is 2.5, which is not significantly higher than the "boron factor of many of the ground waters throughout the area.
nu 3o*i »e*r
The ground water analyzed from wells H/6-jrt5& and 1-TP1- in the Boron area showed a specific conductance slightly higher than those
tjfoo throughout the area, being on the order of «3i,QOO micromhos. The boron concentrations ranged from 20 to 35 PP*n and the boron factor ranged from 13 to 2k. The "boron factor of this water averaged 18 tines more than the average "boron factor throughout the area.
These examples demonstrate the necessity of caution in interpreting the significance of the boron concentration in ground water. A high boron concentration can.be achieved "by the concentration of ground water by evaporation in local areas and does not necessarily indicate a unique mineral source which is "being introduced into the ground water. Thus, the average concentrations of dissolved solids or the specific conductance and the average boron concentrations of a.11 the ground waters throughout the area under investigation were used as a basis of comparison when it was suspected that a unique boron water was found. For example, if the average type of water in the Boron and Koehn Lake areas were concentrated ^0 to 50 times, the water would be similar to the more concentrated waters in the vicinity of Koehn Lake, indicating no significance to an apparently high concentration in the naturally concentrated water.

35
Chemical Symbols Used on Iteps
The chemical character of the ground waters also is summarized by use of symbols on plates k, 9, and 12. A typical set of symbols and their meaning as they apply to a well or spring is as follows:
8^.8 - 0.9 0.5
A
ci (367)
The center of the geometric symbol ( £<^ ) is at the location of the well or spring on the nap, and the symbol indicates the character of the water (calcium chloride in this example) as shown on plate 2. The letter and number below the geometric symbol indicate the well number (Cl) as described in the well-numbering system* The number in parenthesis is the depth of the well in feet
The number in the numerator of the fraction preceding the decimal point is the percent reacting value of the calcium and magnesium combined (8^). The number to the right of the decimal point is the percentage reacting value of the carbonate and bicarbonate combined (8) The number to the rigftt of the dash is the concentration of the boron, in parts per million (0,9). The denominator of the fraction is the specific conductance in micromhos at 25°C (1,890). The number, to the right of the fraction is the boron factor (0*5).

DESCRIPTION OF GROUHD-MATER AREAS
In all the areas canvassed water wells tap relatively thick sections of alluvium of Quaternary and possibly late Tertiary age. These deposits contain ground water,, and yield water to wells at rates ranging from a fe# to several thousand gallons per minute. Unfortunately, most of the used wells were concentrated in local areas throughout most of the western part of the Mojave Desert, and for these there was inadequate perforation^and 'welljfdepth^) iiitoaastesGBs As a result^ the interpretation of the hydrologic - and quality of water conditions was somewhat difficult. The waterlevel measurements made during the well canvass have been used to construct, where possible, water-level contours, which are shown en plates 3 and 3. In areas where wells are sparse no contours were drawn*

Boron Area of Antelope Valley
Geology and Physiography
The Boron area of this report (pi. l) is in the northeasir part of Antelope Valley. extending north from U. S. Highway k66 to the Rand Mountains. Most of the runoff from this area drains southward to the north end of Rogers Lake or to the numerous small playas several miles to the north*
'Throughout most of the area (pi. 3) extensive granitic outcrops i>
occur. la the southern part considerable /gortlary volcanic and $? T:rT>^^ ~%*
clastic rocks,occur along with the crystalline rocks* Several major northwest-trending and a few east-trending faults traverse parts of the area. T^e Sraaer borate deposit is about 3 miles northwest of the town of Boron, and is associated with the Tertiary volcanics vhich crop out in the vicinity of the deposit.

38
Occurrence and Movement of Ground Water
Most of the 'ground water in Antelope Valley is derived from precipitation that falls on the higher parts of the San Gabriel and Tehachapi Mountains, south of the area covered by this report. In the Boron area, as shown by water-level contours (pi. 3)> ground water moves generally southward, the gradient being approximately ID feet to the mile from well 12/8-3^Al, 9 miles northwest of Boron, to well 11/3-15C1, 6 miles northwest of Boron. Immediately south of well 11/8-15C1 a partly buried basalt ridge probably acts as a barrier impeding ground-water movement from the north. As the barrier, which is parallel to the north ends of sees. 1^, 15, and lo, T. UN., R. 3 W», is crossed there is a displacement of water levels between wells 11/3-15C1 and .20H1 of about 70 feet in 2 miles. The basalt forming this ridge, which dips below the Kramer borate deposit, 'together with, the clay bed, which overlies the borate deposit beneath the valley floor, effectively prevent ground water from coming in contact with the deposit.
Approximately 3 to k miles east of Boron there is a ground-water divide, east of which ground water moves eastward into Harper Valley, and west of which water moves westward.' From the wide spacing of the contours (pi. 3)> it would seem that westward movement is relatively slow and that only a small volume of ground water moves in that direction. The spacing of the contours suggests also that a somewhat greater volume of ground water moves into the valley west of Boron from the north.

39
Incoriplete geophysical data, geologic mapping of the unconsolidated deposits by Hit* Gi v&sdr-^ittr~a5r3XiG&, and well logs suggest that the ground water moving from the north is restricted to relatively narrow and thin deposits of older alluvium between the ridges of the basalt and tuff beds. Supply wells 11/8-2TH and 2112 of the Pacific Coast Borax Co» are located on the north side of the postulated ground-water barrier in 11/8-15* These wells tap relatively coarse sections of older alluvium that have a high percentage$basaltic sand and gravel.
The water-level contours on plate 3 show that ground-water discharge from the Boron area occurs through the alluvial deposits in a "narrows" between essentially non-water-bearing rocks/principally in sees. 17 and 18, T. 11 IT., R. 9 V7. This outlet is the only area of subsurface outflow not ciLLy for the Boron area but also for Antelope Valley. The ground water sp discharged moves northwest into the Koehn Lake area (Pl. 3).

Chemical Character of Ground Water

In the Boron area a special effort was made to determine whether

useful geochemical guides to economic sources of boron could be devel-

oped. Efforts were made to collect as many water samples as possible

in and around the borate ore body in order to determine the relation

between the ground water and a known ore deposit. Thirteen water

samples were collected and analysed and three additional analyses

were obtained from the Survey's files. With the exception of three

samples, two taken immediately above .the ore body during coring oper-

ations and one from well 11/8-22E1 of unknown depth on the western

fringe of the ore body, no significantly*large concentrations of

boron were found in the samples analyzed.

In general the ground water of the Boron area can be classed as a

sodium sulfate chloride water. (See pis.. 2, kt and 5.) Analyses -of

'

water from the Pacific Coast Borax Co. well 11/8-2N1, several miles

north of the ore body, and well 3lAl-31Nl, 11 miles northeast of the

ore body, showed rather similar compositions. The specific conductance

of the water from each of the wells is on the order of SOO, and the

boron concentrations and factors are, respect!vely, 0.6 ppm and 6,7

for both wells. The bicarbonate and sulfate concentrations in well

11/8-2N1 are 205 and 93 ppm, respectively, and in well 31/%1-31N1

are 128 and 15^- ppni, respectively.

The blend of ground waters moving southwest from well 11/8-2N1

and west from well 11/8-2^4-Dl is shown by the analysis of water from

well 11/8-20H2 and in general suggests an overall increase in the percentage of calcium and magnesium. This increase could be accounted for by the leaching of Tertiary continental deposits which contain limy marl and limestone. However, the specific conductance and boron concentrations

of waters to the southwest are comparable to the waters to the north. Water from well ll/8-2^HL does not show this increase of calciun, but it is reported that the well in part is drilled in consolidated basalt and does not tap water in the main part of the basin.
Analyses of waters from wells 11/8-26Jl and 10/7-3HL, which are respectively 1.5 miles south and 5 miles southeast .of the ore body, show a greater concentration of dissolved, solids and boron than that from well 11/S-2ZEL, which is north of the ore body; also the relative concentrationfof sulfate and chloride with pG&$£ek to the bicarbonate concentration i& higher. The specific conductances of the waters froa wells 11/8-26J1 and 10/7-3HL are, respectively, 1,351 and 2,070 and the boron concentration and factors are, respectively, 1»3 ppm . and 1*1, and k*5 P?» and 2.2, The reasons for these differences are not obvious- The presence of boron minerals has been reported from numerous test holes north and upgradient from these water wells. The leaching of these reported borates from the sediments could account for the increase of the boron and the increased concentration in the wells south and southeast of the ore body.
The samples collected wj&teb showed significant boron factors were within the area of the borate deposits. The sejrple collected from well 11/8-22KL on the western fringe of the .ore body is similar in chemical character to the ground water sampled from neighboring wells. The specific conductance is 1,150, and the water remains a sodium sulfate chloride type. The concentration of boron is 1^ ppni, and the boron factor is 12.2. This would seem to Indicate that the ground water in this part of the area is in contact with borate-bearing deposits or is being contaminated by the ore body. He^evsaey jfche ground water in

that part of the area where the jssin sodium boratejs are found is perched above the ore body and is not believed to be contaminated by the ore. However, so far as could be determined very little water is perched above the ore body, and it is doubtful whether a significant amount of water moves downgradient from the ore body.
Analyses of perched water collected above the main ore body during the coring of test well 11/8-24B1 indicate that the water was contaminated by shale that immediately overlies the ore body. The specific conductance of this water is 1,990, and the concentration of boron is exceedingly high 314 ppm with a boron factor of 158. The sulfate, chloride concentrations of this water are comparable to those in the ground waters south and southeast of the ore body. Another interesting feature of this water is the unusually high concentration of carbonate, reported a-s 357 ppmr and-is reported to be almost entirely sodium carbonate. The calcinm, magnesium^ and bicarbonate'concentrations are-only a fewparts per million. In most natural ground and surface waters the concentration of the bicarbonate ion is much greater than that of the carbonate ion, which.commonly is only a few parts per million. ' In all probability the green borate-rich shale is the source of the 4a£gh sodium carbonate fto«.eentrefe4on
In speculating on the origin of the Kramer borate deposits and the relation of both ground and surface waters to the genesis of the deposit, the meager data are inconclusive. From the available geologic, hydrologic, and geophysical data it appears that the Kroner borate deposit is of local origin, probably related to the extrusion of the basalt flows of Tertiary age which underlie the borate deposit. The multiples-basin hypothesis for the formation of saline deposits does not seem applicable as an explanation for the origin of the deposit,

and no evidence could be found to substantiate the Kraner basin as part of a series of basins. The Krarner deposit appears to have formed in an isolated fault basin which may have been
a&f.*':.jLt# & ilie xieosj^ien-of - tlie borates*.
The relation of ground and surface waters to the formation of the deposit appears to be of only minor significance. The original boron source say have been a sodium bicarbonate, water highly concentrated in boron,, conparable. to hot-spring waters locally found today in some parts of California. The high percentage of carbonate in the clays of the ore body would tend to indicate a bicarbonate water as the original source of mineralization* Ground or surface waters contemporaneously, or at a later time, appear to have altered somewhat the chenical character of the borates around the fringes of the ore body by supplying the necessary calcium for the formation of colemanite and ulexite^ Because the geologic history and the hydrology of the ancestral basin are extremely complex and have not been resolved, the manner in. which the mineralization occurred within the basin is not known.
Obviously, the hydrologic and geologic conditions which have existed since the formation of the ore body were favorable to the preservation of the Kramer borate deposits. The relatively arid conditions under which fangLctnerate accumulated ever the ore body reduced to a minimum the leaching and removal of the soluble borates v
,M&*M3 T<h5et underlying basalt, which crops out north of the ore body andAfo~rms tha-p^efeabie-ground-water barrier, may have prevented ground water from leaching the deposit to any great extent. It seems reasonable to conclude that if a substantial .supply of ground water had saturated and

noved past the ore body, a substantial prxrt of the borates night have been removed and concentrated as salines in areas of evaporation downgradient from the ore body, such as the Koehn Lake area of recent
%* Hovever, no areas of concentrated borates were found in the groundwater drainage system as it exists today.

Koehn Lake Area of Frenont Valley

Geology and Physiography

The Koehn Lake area and the north part of/Chaffee 5s#in are within

the boundaries of Fremont Valley (pi. ! ). For this investigation only

the Koehn Lake area (pi.. 3) was studied. The Koehn Lake area is

bounded on the south by the Muroc fault, on the west and north by the

Garlock-El Paso fault zone, and on the east and southeast by the

consolidated rocks of the Rand Mountains.

The lowest part of the Koehn Lake area is occupied by a moist playa

known as Koehn Lake (termed Kane or Cane Lake in some earlier reports)

which has an altitude of about 1,900 feet about 370 feet lower than

Rogers Lake, which is the lowest part of Antelope Valley. There is no

surface drainage between Antelope and Ereraont Valleys, but Thompson (1929,

p. 208) suggested the possibility that during a period of greater pre-

. cipitatlon in the Pleistocene epoch a lake may have existed in Antelope

Valley which may have overflowed to Koehn Lake through the now alluviated

gap northwest of Rogers Lake in sees. 17 and 18, T. 11 N*, R. 9 W-

The Koehn Lake area is of particular interest in the present investi-

gation because it is the ultimate destination of ground water in both

Antelope and Fremont Valleys and also because of the deposits 'of nearly

pure sodium chloride and gypsum which occur along the northwestern margin

of the lake* One borax test hole, 30/38-2^Fl, was drilled to a depth of

550 feet near the southern margin of Koehn Lake, but no borates were

*

encountered. Ulexite has been reported in this vicinity by Gale (unpbl»

^J. In addition, ulexite "cottontails" have been mined near.the

surface of the soil northwest of Koehn Lake in sec. 8, T. 30 S., R. 38 E.

Occurrence and Movement of Ground Water
Ground water in appreciable quantities occurs in the unconsolidated alluvial deposits of the Koehn Lake area. All <5$ the ground water in the basin is derived from precipitation within the drainage basin from subsurface flow out of Antelope Valley. This water and friaa nicuj.j.-4>J?""LIiu i eJUeey^move^oward' the lowest part of the basing where it discharges by evaporation from the moist surface of Kbehn Lake, by transpiration from, plants whose roots draw water from ground water, and by. irrigation caaftl flow^feon wells and springs* By far the greatest
^^t. 7 quantity of water coces from the southwest. Several miles south of Kbehn Lake in an area of rather recent large-scale agricultural development, Irrigation wells have been constructed that locally have reported yields of as nich. as ^,000 gpm (gallons per minute).
Part of the ground-water underflow is from Antelope Valley, which moves into the Koehn Lake area through an alluviated gap between Castle
"fcte MU*and Desert Hrfctes, and part is from^Chaffee -3=saa across the itooc fault The Miroc fault, which is the southern boundary of the Kcehn Lake area, is an effective, though not complete, ground-water barrier along its northwest extension. Water levels on the southwest side of the fault in Chaffee Basin are as much as kOQ feet higher than those on the northfidsT vest side of the fault. However, water-level contours show that there is movement northward away from the fault, indicating leakage through or over this barrier. The southeast extension of the Muroc fault in the Boron area does not appear to act as a barrier to the movement of ground water. Wells 11/9-31EOL and 30QJL which are on opposite sides of
the possible southeast extension of the fault do not show disparities "j
in water level.

The -.-rater-level gradient (pi. 3) through the alluvial valley 3 to

5 miles west of Castle Butte is approximately 15 feet per mile westward,

but it flattens considerably at about the west, edge of R. 38 E. This

profile is shown on plate 6. The cause of the apparent ground-water

"nose" in the eastern part of T. 32 S., R. 37 E., is not known, but

geophysical data suggest an undefined structural change in this part

of- the area."

The Garlock fault^ which strikes along the northwest side of Koehn

Laker is a ground-water barrier as indicated by about a 190-foot dis-

placement in water levels at the town of Garlock and by springs along

the prominent escarpnient about 2 miles to the southwest.

The steep hydraulic gradient in, the area 9 miles south-southwest

of Kcehn Lal-ze and the flat gradient in' the area to the north strongly

suggest the presence of a ground-water barrier near or along the abrupt

change in gradient. If a barrier exists, it fis^robably]related to

the southwest-trending fault zone shown along the north side of the .

Band Mountains.

4j

Bydrologic conditions in Koehn Lake area are complex, and it appears

that in addition to unconfined water there are several zones of confined

water as well as semiperched water. A detailed interpretation Of these

several water-bearing zones was beyond the scope of this investigation.

Chemical Character of Ground Water

48

As indicated "by water analyses for wells 12/10-35P1, 32/37-2^N2,

and 32/38-32N1, the ground water that moves northward from Antelope

Valley between Castle and Desert Buttes is of the sodium sulfate chloride

"type- (See pis. \ and 7») The specific conductance is on the order of

8-00 and.the boron concentration and factor are, respectively, about OA

ppni and OA- The. .concentrations of bicarbonate, sulfate, and chloride

average about 22Q, 100, and 80 ppm, respectively.

Froni this area northward to Koehn Lake a series of samples were

collected from wells along a 12-mile reach. A progressive decrease »
in the percentage of sodium occurred from 83 in well 12/10-35P1> east

of Desert Butte, to k" in well 30/37-36C1, a few miles west of Koehn

Lake. This decrease was enough to change the water from the sodium

type to one Is which no cation exceeded 50 percent. The -specific con-

ductance of the water averaged about 800, the boron concentration and

.

factor, respectively, averaging about 1.0 ppm and 1.2. Possible re-

charge from the west together with the ground water crossing the Muroc

fault and mixing with the water moving northward from Antelope Valley

could account for the change in quality of water. The decrease from

83 to kj percent sodium is not the normal direction for base exchange.

General 1 y, base exchange involves the replacement of sodium ions, held

in the sediment or soil, by the calcium and magnesium ions in the ground

water, thereby increasing the concentration of sodium and decreasing the

calcium and magnesium in the ground water. However, base exchange is

reversible, so that under certain conditions an increase in the concen-

tration of calcium and magnesium in the ground water and a proportionate

decrease in the amount of sodium could occur.

Another significant change in the character of ground water moving north toward Koehn Lake is the increase in the bicarbonate concentration, with a corresponding decrease in the sulfate and chloride concentrations. The bicarbonate concentration averages about 300 ppm and the sulfate and chloride concentrations average about 130 and 25 ppm, respectively. The boron concentration and factor are usually less than 1 ppia and 1.0, respectively* Possible mixing of water moving from the vicinity of Jaw Bone Canyon to the west with that from the south could account for the change in chemical character.
- Ground water moving from the north and northwest, principally from the area of Red Rock Canyon, is of the sodium sulfate type. Analysis of water fron veil 30/37-12N1 ia "the wash of Red Rock Canyon shows a specific conductance of 3>^80> with sulfate, chloride, and bicarbonate concentrations of 93^> ^27, and 1.96 ppm, respectively. The sodium concentration is on the order of 800 ppm and the calcium and magnesium concentrations total less than 65 ppm. The boron concentration and factor are respectively 33 PP^ and 10/0% This relatively high boron factor is significant and suggests the possibility of borate mineralization in the large exposed section of Tertiary volcanics and elastics in the vicinity of Red Rock Canyon. This area has been mapped by Dibblee (1952) but no borate deposits were found. However, ulexite "cottoriballs" have been found in the. upper few feet of soil several railes southeast of the mouth of Red Rock Canyon. It is possible that the borates are disseminated throughout parts of the Tertiary section and that no distinct deposit occurs. It would seem reasonable to conclude that the source of the borates in the valley north of Koehn Lake is Red Rock Canyon.

50-

S:.nples collected from springs along the El Paso and Garlock fault

zones north of Koehn Lake have boron concentrations and factors, respec-

tively, on the order of 1 ppn and 1.0.

Ground water moving toward Koehn Lake from the northeast is comparable
fl-4%2,1
to the sodium sulfate chloride 1^s?e that moves toward Koehn Lake from

the south. The .specific conductance is on the order of 1,100, and the

boron concentration and factor are, respectively, somewhat higher than

1 ppia and 1.0»

The area in and around Koehn Lake exhibits the hydrologic and

geochemical complexities which arise in many of the desert basins of

interior drainage. Although the principal movement of ground water is

from the south, some waters of diversified chemical character reach

the lake area from the north, east, and west. The chemical analyses

indicate six distinct types of ground water in and around Koehn Lake.

They are: (l) sodium sulfate^chloride, (2) sodium sulfate, (3) sodium

chloride, (*0 calcium bicarbonate, (5) calcium chloride, and (6) waters
to
in which alkalinity or salinity as>« not dominant. (See pis. 2 and 7-)

The specific conductance of ground water in and around Koehn Lake

ranges from about TOO to 20,000. The boron concentrations and factors

range, respectively, from OA to 51 ppm and from 0.2 to 10. Water from

well 30/33-2te., which has a depth of 500 feet, has a specific conductance

on the order of 20,000 and a boron concentration and factor of 51 ppm

and 2.5, respectively. The analysis shows that the ground waters southgit^' -^
east of Koehn Lake are highly concentrated^ probably clue to evaporation

of ground water during the deposition of the deposits and to lack of

ground-water movement through the area. Kbehn Lake is the "sink" for

all ground water in Fremont Valley.

H

Flowing veil 30/3S-8Jljon/the '.-/astern edge of Koehn Lake, has a .3?<7
specific conductance of 7,^^» The concentrations of chloride, sulfate, 0yJ
and bicarbonate are, respectively, 2,130, 535, f263 ppm, the sodium concentration is 1,630 ppnyand the calcium and magnesium concentrations
are only 59 and Ik ppm, respectively. This is a sodium chloride water
and is radically different from the ground waters from other sources
moving toward Kbehn Lake. In addition, samples collected from wells
on the southeastern edge and several miles east of the lake were sodium
chloride t^ae- waters. Several miles south and southwest of Koehn Lake,
wells 30/33-32121 and 30/38-3^. yielded a calcium chloride -^^e water.
The reasons for the diverse chemical character of ground waters around
the lake are not understood fully, but in part probably are caused by
base exchange and in part are known to result from the -deposits through
which the ground waters move to reach the lake.
The diversity of the ground waters closely parallels the diversity
of the sedimentation and mineralization of the area. Within an area of ~?-:- -' ' "-
a few^miles ulexite "cottonballs, 11 sodium chloride, and calcium sulfate
were mined at one time. The concentrations of ground waters, temperature^,
humidity, solubilities, and base exchange are among the most prominent
environmental factors in influencing the mineralizatior of saline playas.
The reasons why sodium chloride is deposited at a certain time in one
part of the area and calcium sulfate in another part are not apparent.
Detailed geologic, hydrologic, and mineralogic studies of / Koehn Lake s>$J &sJ '^ ^f^W<d
might explain many of the phenomena that were eneeaa^ered; during this
reconnaissance investigation.

Middle I'ojave Valley

Geology and Physiography

That partr of the Middle Kojave Valley (pi. 8) studied in this recon-

naissance investigation adjoins Harper Valley on the north and extends

from Hodge northeastward to Barstow. In the* vicinity of Kodge the valley

fa is restricted -vtth metamorphic and crystalline rocks cropping out on

/

both sides of the river^flood plain. North of Hodge the valley broadens

and extends northward to Harper Valley and eastward to the narrows at

Barstow. In general^ the alluvial deposits are relatively thick, but

locally in areas where isolated granitic rocks crop out in the valley.,

the deposits probably are relatively thin. Large areas of older alluvial

deposits crop cut in the southern part of the area.

Cne r-ajor fault, termed the Lockhart fault, trends southeast from

Harper Valley into the Middle Mojave Valley. If the fault does continue

through this part of the Middle Mojave Valley, it would'pass approximately
fa-j&\£MA&* S*
through the term of Hinkley. Jits position and existence near Hinkley
v sfs based on water-level data, as discussed in the next section of the ret>ort.
** -fh
In the vicinity of Hinkley, at depths ££e» 120 to 150 feet below land ^
&4
surface, t&ege-occurs a relatively extensive and continuous bed of blue
fwM*<*3
clay. The extent of this clay, which may -tfe an old lake bod, is not known,

"but it probably is at least 10 square miles. Chis deposit probably was

laid down when the Mojave River was dammed at the narrows at Barstow,,

possibly during Pleistocene time.

During infrequent large floods on the Mojave River, surface water

overflows its banks and some water flows northward from the area east of
^r
Hinkley through a narrows to Harper Valley. It is believed,the Mbjave
Jhv> ^^
River intermittently discharged into Harper Valley probably A
late Pleistocene time.

Occurrence and Movement of Ground Water

55
. * **

The principal area of ground-water development in the Middle Mojave " S 3,5^ &*&i£j *'
Valley is in the vicinity of Hinkley. In this area at least a-iie ooot>ioiM»

of alfalfa o^er irrigated by wells that pump between 1,500 to 2,000 gpm. '
X-*
Most of the water in this area is pumped from permeable lenses of sand

and gravel that overlie the blue clay -isesfeer. Where the blue clay is

found., it seems to be the lower limit of good production-^l&«. Wells

drilled through the clay have not shown any increase in. production,
**" \ according to local drillers and land owners*
isilL UdL& Between Hodge and Lenwood there is a large reentrant^ tjSarfc&fr south-
?;tCA
east of the Mbjave River. Wells in this Aare pumped for domestic uses

^

only* Along the Mojave River, particularly in sec^^A and 15, T. 9 H.,

R. 3 '**, alfalfa is irrigated from wells that pump as much as 2,000 gpm.

That part of the Middle Mojave Valley east of the Kraraer Hills, £C,
south of U, p. Highway k66, and west ofx north-south line through 'Wild -
was canvassed, but no used wells were found.

Ground water moves downstream toward Hodge from the southwest and

the gradient at Hodge is approximately 10 feet to the raile (pi. 8).

Downstream froia Hodge ground water moves northward toward Hinkley and
iW^v
northeastward toward Barstow ;$£&* a gradient of fsaeas 10 to 20 feet to

the mile.

About 2 miles southeast of Hinkley the gradient abruptly steepens

to almost 70 feet per mile as ground water moves into a cone of depression

created by a relatively large draft from wells for irrigation. However,

the cone in part may be steepened or modified by the Lockhart fault, which *
enters the valley from the northwest. The fault may extend as far south-

east as the cone of depression and there may act as a partial ground-

water barrier.

Several niles east of the ground-water depression near Kinkley,

the ground-water flow divides. Part of the movement is westward and

northwestward toward the depression and Harper Valley, respectively, and

part naves eastward downstream toward Barstow.

About k miles southeast of Lenwood, the' altitude of the water surface

in wells 9/2-3^-ML and 3^M2 is approximately 230 feet higher than that

near the river. Although the water-level contours near these wells are
as
poorly controlled,, they indicate4,. ground-water contribution to the Middle
Mojave Valley from' the southeast.

Owing to the lack of wells in the western part of the Mojave River

Valley east of the Eraser Hills, essentially nothing is known about the

occurrence arid movement of ground water. Presumably, a small amount of

ground water is supplied to the valley' from the hills. Some recharge

to the broad valley area around the junction of Harper Lake Road and

.U. S. Highway !*66 .(piU 8) may be supplied from the Mojave River through

j>/2<£/*w

"

the gap i^ well 9A-33J1-

55
Chemical Character of Ground //ater
C-round --rater -,&t4e*j novec northward from Lenwocd is a calcium , bicarbonate water. (See pis. 9 and 10.) The specific conductance is on the order of 500 and the boron concentration is usually less than 0.2 ppn. As the water moves northward and northeastward, spreading out through the area, a change occurs. Southeast of Hinkley, the "water tapped by wells is the type that is neither saline or alkaline (pis. 2 and 10) and the specific conductance increases to more than 1,500 with no appreciable change in the boron concentration. Through this part of the area the water has an abnormally high nitrate concentration on the order of 15 ppa. In general, wells showing high nitrate concentrations
4*MAw*U\
penetrate the blue clay* bed. The high nitrate^. could be caused by-ti of organic matter in the blue clay by calcium
A
bicarbonate vaster such as the type that recharges the. area from the It appears reasonable that the change in character of the waters >>*^/i£
rnust be c2ue either to the reaction of the water with the water-bearing deposits or to the leaching of the deposits by returned irrigation waters In either case the chemical change of the ground waters reflects the^character of the soluble minerals in the deposits that have been taken into solution or replaced by minerals in solution, or both.
West and southwest of HinKLey wells 10/3-29ML, 10/3-30Q2, and 10/3-33C1 indicate that the ground water is predominately a sodium sulfate^
^fcy»e^i»*fci3a*. specific conductance/of 800, 968, and 532, respectively boron concentration is between 0.6 and 1.3 ppm, and the boron factors

Wells 10/3-2J1 and 23JL, in the gap about ^ miles northeast of Hinkley through which ground water moves into Harper basin, tap an aquifer vhich yields a sodium sulfatej^chloride water. These waters
have a relatively high concentration indicated by a specific conductance of 3,610, for veil 2J1 and 1,79$ miegopAos for well 2qi» The respective boron concentrations are 9-2 and 5.0 ppm; and the respective boron factors are -I&*T*CT?and <*%*B%. Both jg£- these w'ells are less than' 100 feet (i&&%
and are perforated in an zones beneath the water table. From Hodge to Barstow along the channel and flood plain of the Mojave River the ground water is4the calcium bicarbonate type previously discussed. However, south and southeast^a^ of the river, the ground water that moves toward the river from the valley area about 3 miles southeast of Lenwood is of the sodium bicarbonate type. The specific conductance is on the order of 600 and the boron concentration about
The -significant difference is the higher concentration of sodium as couiDared to the high-calcium ground waters beneath the I'l
A flood plain.

57
Harper Valley
Geology and Physiography
Harper Valley is a topographic depression whose lowest part is occupied by Harper Lake, which in large part is a dry-type playgy but along the eastern end is a moist-type playa. The northern limit of ths valley is defined by Black Mountain, which is composed of basalt of Quaternary age and by an extensive series of continental deposits of Tertiary age. The eastern margin is marked by granitic and metamorphic rocks and the western margin is marked by isolated outcrops of granitic rocks. However, the southern limit, which adjoins the Mojave River Valley, is arbitrary, there, being no surface divide between the two. As already explained, both surface drainage and ground-water movement occur from the Middle Mojave 'Valley to Harper Valley through the gap north of Einkley.
j&srvf^
*&&- valley is traversed by a series of northwest-trending faults. 2-
A series of prominent fault scarps can be observed alom the foot of Black Mountain. The major faults are the Lockhart fault, which trends through the center of the valley a few miles south of Harper Lake* and the Gravel Hills fault, which trends in the same direction north of Harper Lake.
The Lockhart Ranch, which is the principal development in the area, is about 7 miles north of U. S. Highway h66 along Harper Lake Road.

Occurrence and Movement of Ground Water

The water-level contour map (pi. 9) indicates that ground water

coves into the central part of Harper Valley from all directions. Possibly
// vv';^^
the largest quantity^ into the area is from the Middle Mojave Valley in

the \~icinity of Hinkley. Some ground-water recharge /also! may^ccurlfrom

^Cuddeback Valley to the north, which is approximately 600 feet higher . t/o*s i
tnan Harper 7ajJ.sy» However, if such recharge -shswid; occur, the quantity

does not appear to be large. Probably only minor amounts of ground water

enter Harper Valley from the east and vest where the hills are low and

presumably recharge is small. West of Hinkley some water may cross the

Lockhart fault*

The Locl-iJiart fault (extended) seems to form" a barrier to grcund-

water ~ove-:e-t north of wells 10/iJ~8Pl, loA-2kJl, 10/^-25AL, 10/5-3KL,

and 11/5-3531* Along the fault from .northwest to southeast, the gradient.

between wells 10/5-3H1 and ll/5-35Ivil and that north of the fault suggests

a water-level displacement of ^0 to 50 feet, fiitnjthe level north of the ^

fault being lower; the altitude of the water level in veil 3.0/4-8P1,

which was about 2,0o% feet, is about 100 feet higher than that in well
Q\ ^ north of the fault; and the altitudes of the levels in wells

/N

and 25A1, which was about 2,150 feet, is more than 100 feet

higher than that north of the fault if the gradient is. orojected south-

east from 2,000-foot contour to sec. 18, T, 10 K., P. 3 "-r«
^
Owing to the heavy pumping $£ the Lockhart Ranch, a ground-water

depression has developed about 1 mile southwest of Harper Lake. The

contours show that ground water is moving toward the center of this

pumping depression from all sides. The ground water moving eastward toward

the Locldiart Ranch from the vicinity of Hinkley has a gradient of approx-

imately 10,to 20 feet per mile. About 5 niles cast nf the pwnping

59
depression the gradient starts to steepen and reaches a -maximum of at least 50 feet per mile near the center of the depression.
' fell 11/5-1^31, a mile east of the punrping depression, appears to tap .a'perched ground water. The water level .in this well is 115 feet higher than that in the nearest well, which is half a mile to the east. Also, the guaZ.iAjgaa£ water from this shallow well is more concentrated
&&**'
than that jj«r other wells in this part of the valley. Well 11/3-30A1, 7 miles west of Lockhart Ranch, was flowing in 195^ The depth of the . well was not measured but was reported to be 200 feet.

60
Chemical Character of Ground Water
Wells sampled in the eastern part of the Harper Valley yield water comparable in quality to the moderately concentrated intermediate-type water of the Middle Mojave Valley near Hinkley. The specific conductance is on"the order of 500, the boron concentration and factor being about 1.0 ppm and 2»Q, respectively.
Water from flowing veil 11/3-30A1 is of the sodium bicarbonate type 5^2-
and has a boron concentration and factor of ^.k ppm and J tie*, respectively, which are abnormally high. The fact that this well draws water from a relatively deep confined aquifer whereas nearby wells draw from a shallower aquifer may account for'its'different character. '
Ground water sampled in the vicinity of the Lockhart Ranch, between the. Lockhart fault to the southwest and Harper Lake to the northwest, shows a rather uniform composition. The specific conductance is about 1,300, the boron concentrations and factors never exceeding 1.5 ppm and 1.0, respectively. The waters are of the sodium chloride sulfate type and the percentage reacting value of the sodium (percent sodium) is generally 50 percent or more.
One well, 11/5-ltoL, yielded a water of the sodium chloride sulfate type having the same general percentage reacting values as other nearby
*s wells. However, the specific conductance was ?.»300 and the boron
SS concentration and factor were 8.7'ppn* and 1.2, respectively. This water appears to be from a perched or semiperched water body, because the water level in the well is more than 100 feet higher in a well 0.6 mile to the east and there is no evidence of a ground-water barrier between them.

61

Southwest of the Lockhart fault wells 11/6-17X1 and 11/6-20A1 yield

id water with significant "boron concentration^and factors. They are, 13
respectively, 20 ppm and -ie- for well 11/6-i^a and 35 ppm and 2^ for well

11/6-20A1. The specific conductances are -1^6yand !,%£, respectively.

Ths conposition of this water and the proportion of constituents is

$J//- #6

Ub . (/X^,

coaparable to the ground water in the western part of Harper basin.

A f\

The main, difference between the two is the increased boron concentration

without a corresponding increase in concentration of the other constituents

It is also of significance that coleiaanite, which is a calciurajtoorate

mineral, had been reported in test holes drilled in this vicinity.

62
Cuddeback Valley
Cuddeback Valley (pi. 12), also known as Golden Valley (Thompson, 1929) , is a well defined basin of interior drainage. Its lowest part is occupied by Cuddeback Lake, a dry-type playa. There is a low divide at the southern end of the valley, and it appears as though surface water once flowed southward to Harper Lake through an eroded gap which had developed along the contact of the granitic rocks of Fremont Peak and continental deposits of Tertiary age immediately east of Fremont Peak. However, faulting along the Tertiary section and deposition of alluvial fans have caused the drainage to be interrupted.
North and northwest of the center of the valley are extensive outcrops IrfJ&i**^
of volcanic rocks of Tertiary age, whereas the western, most of the
frsfav*tfl&^
southern/ and eastern borders of the valley gfr*vTmlMly" fomrfiiali o£ granitic rocks. Extensive alluvial fans and pediments have developed along the western and particularly the eastern part^ of the valley.
1^ During the investigation, only 13 wells were located of which -tve> wells 29A1-22B1 and 3^-Kl, are in the mountains east of Johannesburg. Owing to insufficient water-level data, water-level contours were not constructed in this valley. However, the existing data indicate that there is no ground-water recharge from adjoining valleys and that all the water in Cuddeback Valley is derived from precipitation that falls within the boundaries of the drainage area. On the other hand, there appears to be possible southeastward drainage of ground water from Cuddeback Valley to Harper Valley.

Water samples collected in Cuddeback Valley show no significant "boron concentrations. Water from wells 30/^1- 3oGl and 30/^2-2^?! on the vest and east sides of the valley, respectively, are of similar conipositions. (See.pls. 12 and 13 ) They are a sodium bicarbonate^ chloride water Jriasch is -aiwo characteristic in the Boron area and part
A of the Koehn Lake area. The specific conductance is on the order of 600 and the concentration of boron is 0.5 PP^ or less. The water from well 30/^2-20Kl, near the center of the basin, is more typical of the higl concentrated ground water found in evaporite-type playas. It is a sodium chloride water containing relatively minor concentrations of bicarbonate and sulfate. Specific conductance is 6,8£$., but the boron concentration is only 1.5 ppm.

6k.

Superior Valley

Superior Valley, like Cuddeback Valley to the west, is a well-

defined topographic basin of interior drainage. The lowest part of

the valley (pi. 12) contains four separate snail dry-type playas which

are alibied nearly east-west across the valley. There appears to have

been an outlet for surface water through the southwest corner of the

valley into Black Canyon«which leads to Harper Valley. However,

uplift along the ELackwater fault, which trends northwest along the

southwestern border of the valley, and local deposition of alluvial-

fan deposits has blocked the surface outlet.

. The western SOT. parts of the southern and eastern, margins of the

valley are ccnrroeed of granitic£*g?e rocks. The Black Mountain basalt

of Quaternary age underlies the southwestern flank of the valley. The

northern part of the area is exposed almost entirely -of Terb-feaaiy^ - /\

~!
cont inental deposits ^' " * <-'-' " ' ^*'c/ '" c $

A

T-.v-o major northwest-trending faults traverse the valley area. One is the Blackwater fault along the west side and the other is an unnamed fault along the eastAwhich probably extends farther northwest than A, shown on plate 12 and which probably forms a barrier to ground-water movement.
A total" of 11 wells were inventoried in the valley, which, when visited, was uninhabited. The northern part of the valley is used as a gunnery range.
The depth to water beneath the central part of the area is between 87 and 110 feet. This depth to water is too great to permit discharge in the playa areas. Because the gradients are nearly flat, it is difficult to determine where ground-water discharge from the valley occurs.

However, the movement may be to the east toward Coyote Valley across the northwest-trending fault along the east side of Superior Valley. The difference in water-level altitudes in 1953-5^ between wells 33-A6-12P1 and 31/^7-5Hl, which are west and east of the fault barrier, respectively, was 57 feet, the level being lower east of the fault.
A water sample was taken from test well 3lAo-l6jl in 1953 by the Bureau of Laud Management. This analysis shows a sodium chloride water having a specific conductance of 2,520 and a boron concentration of 0.9 ppm. The main constituents are 672 ppm of chloride and 300 of sodium.

66
REFERENCES
California Dapt. Public Works, Div. Water Resources, 193^> Mojave River Investigation, Bull, kj, 2^9 p.
Coilins, W. D., 1923, Notes on practical water analysis: U. S. Geol. Survey Water-Supply Paper 596-H, p. 235-266.
Dibbles, T- W., Jr., 1952, Geology of the Saltdale quadrangle, California: Calif. Div. Mines Bull. 160.
Piper, A. M», 19^5 > A graphic procedure in the geocheinical interpretation of water analyses; Am. Geophys. Union Trans., pt. 6, p. 9lk-923; discussion,.p. 92^-923.
Piper, A. M., and Garrett, A. A., 1953^ Native and contaminated ground vaters in the Long Beach-Santa Ana area,- California: U. S. Geol. Survey Water-Supply Paper 1136, 320 p.
Thompson, D. G., 1929, The Mohave Desert region, California: U. S. Geol. Survey Water-Supply Paper 578, 759 p.

67
Table 3.- Description of water yells in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif,
Table 3 presents selected data for veils shown on maps and described
in the text* Bie veils are listed by the areas shown on page 1. In
addition to these veils, the veil index contains those veils for vhich
basic data vere collected although the veils vere not inventoried in
the field*
Well number.-~!I3ie U. S. Geological Survey veil-numbering system designates the veil location according to the General Land Office rectangular land survey, as explained In the introduction*
Altitude* The altitude given is the land-surface altitude or datum at the veil in feet above mean sea level* The letter at preceding this figure indicates an approximate altitude estimated from a topographic map having a eontomr interval of 25 feet or more. Altitudes not preceded by the letter _a vere determined either by barometer or by interpolation from the 5~fooz contour interval for veils on topographic map of the Kraaer berate district, vhich has a scale of 1:25-,000.
Depth*- -The depth of the veil is in feet belov land-surface datura* Depths in feet, and tenths vere measured by the Geological Survey; depths given in whole feet are reported.
Depth to vater.' The standing or nonpumping vater levels in veils are in feet belov land-surface datum. Depths in feet and tenths of feet, tenths, and hundredths are measurements by the Geological Survey. Depths given in vhole feet are reported.
Chemical quality. Ihe chemical quality is indicated by specific conductance in micromhos at 25°C (K x 10 ) of a sample of vater pumped or bailed from the veil. Also shown is the boron content of the vater sample in parts per million and the boron factors as explained in the text. Analyses are by the laboratory of the Geochemistry and Petrology Branch of the Geological Survey in daremont, except as indicated by footnotes.

68

Table 3»- Description of water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif > Continued

Antelope Valley

(Measurements from March 1951 through April 1953)

Well nmnber

4 i-
Altitade of >land surface
(ft above

Depth of veil (ft below

Depth

CHiemicsil qualii;y

to water Specific »

>4

(ft below conductance Boron Boron

sea level) Isd) . Isd) . . (micromhos (ppm) factor

< a-h ?S°C)

10/7- 3SL

-

_

«*

2,070 4.5

2.2

5A1 -

-

-

1,810 2.2

1.2

H/7-13KL

2,577

404

270.2

p. M

30G1 a2,475

675

310

1,190 1.3

1*1

32G1 2,463

»

w

_M

32G2 2,459

210

-

~

-.

32G3 2,457 300 170

-m

11/7-32KL 32!O. 32JJ2 32N3
n/8- 2z£
n/8- 2j»2
11D2
1231
15d 19KL

2,445 2,456 2,458 2,463 2,480
2,489 2,476 2,537 2,436 2,354

410 300 454 400
400
336
514 ~ . 355.8

201.2 .
225
178.0
188.0 168 224.1 140.7 142.90

.. 1,530
b 805
871 789 ~ -

M
2.7
.6 .6 .5 « *

.
1.8 P. .7
.7 .6 ^ -

11/8-20H1 20H2 20H1 ppm
243L

2,380 2,384
2,370 2,398
-

300 500 152.0 -
315

166.4 170.8
dry M -

w 671 bl,150
1,990

** 1.0 **
14
314

« 1.5 -
12.2
158

11/8-24D2 26EL 26J1 28A1 32G1

..
2,388 2,415 2,384 2,341

M
175 400 176.1 156.0

^
160.4 172.3 130.66

2,160 -
1,350 -

250
-
1.3
-

116
1.0 -

11/9- 7M1
12L1 13R1 14B1 17ML

2,335 a2,385
a2,350 a2,370 a2,326

165.0 200+
188.0
157*0
200.0

155.0
168.64 134*38
156.78 130.05

-M
- . «. -« -» * P*

b. Analysis from Quality of Water Branch, Geological Survey, Sacramento, Calif.

Table 3*- Description of water wells In part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif. Continued

Antelope Valley Continued

(Measurements from March 1951 through April 1953)

Well number

Altitude of land surface
(ft above sea level)

Depth of well (ft below
Isd) .

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

:

conductance: Boron I Boron

(micromhos : (ppm) J factoi

at 25^0) :

11/9-17M2
19A1
22Q1
23HL
24B1

^
2,318 a2,320
a2,370
a2,335

-
200
155.0

134 124.50 106.77
143 131.29

-'
0896
964

P»
m
1.2
.3

.. -
1.3 3

11/9-30Q0L
3133L. 3231
32d
34AL

a2,315 a2,330 a2,290 a2,290
2,303

169.1
200
87.0
79-3 193.5

99.99 115.14
dry
dry
93.11

w
bl,300 -

w
.3

.2 *
-

ll/9-34ia 36H1
U/10-36EL
31/40-32?!
3581

.2,300
2,311 a2,345
2,802
2,750

147 191 300* 256.3 217.0

80.75 95
253.7 195.95

__ ' -
"

M P« .» "

M » » -

31/41-31H1 32/39- 4KL
4L1
30J1

2,775 a2,725 2,485

340 -
237-0
253.0

219.8 208.3 229.3

806 -
1,700
M

.6
3.3
. .»._

.7 1.9

^» Analysis from Quality of Water Branch, Geological Survey, Sacramento, Calif.

70

Table 3»- Description of water veils in part of the western Kojave Desert, Calif. Continued

Frercont Valley

(Measurements from Sept. 1951 through May 1953)

Well number

»
^Altitude of rland surface : (ft above : sea level)

Depth of well (ft ^elow
Isd)

Depth

Chemical quality

to vater Specific :

:

(ft below conductance: Boron : Boron

Isd) (micromhos : (ppm) 5 factor

at 25°C) :

:

11/11- 2KL 6D1 8DL
18D1 20Q1

a2,510 a2,720 a2,6^0
a2,670 a2,600

81.1 256.3
20*1.
220+ 76.2

dry «
200.3
213-5
dry

11/11-30K1
32ia
3^M1 11/12-1210.
- 12ML
n/12-l^HL 26J1 25J2
12/8-3^Al
12/10-35P1
29/38-2731
3^?1 29/39-20Q1
22D1 27KL

a2,575 a2,600 a2,550 a2,750 a2,725
2,722 a2,605 a2,605
2,527 2,365
a2,250
1,93^
a2,l65
2,1^3

, 112.8 282.3 261
ho
263 225 3'6_1 271.8
m. 22.5 &.h 125.0

12^.8 78.8
dry dry
dry 15^-5
158 216.55 195-Vr
spring dry spring
*9-31 dry

738 o.i
882 0.8 1,710 .9

0.1 0.9
.5

29/39-28J1 30J1 31AL 32d
.35H1
29/iK)-21Al 30/37-12N1
13EL 13E2
13KL

2,098 1,98^ 1,980
1,980 2,293
a2,800 a2,190
-

265 165 238 -
160 2,900
2,910
1,859

173.09
72
65
T9-3 325
if08 105.30
-

1,130 1.3 3,^30 33

1.2
9-5

71

Table 3.- Description of -water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif, Continued

_
Well number
30/37-22A1 23J1 2kGL 2^J1
2km.

Frernont Valley Continued

Altitude of land surface
(ft above sea level)

Depth
of veil (ft below
Isd)

a2,170
- 2,015 1,990
1,967
1,985

M ,-
211 -

Depth to w^ter (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

:

conductance: Boron : Boron

(microiahos : (ppm) : factor

.at 25°C) :

:

180
56.7^
^8.01 19 32.6k

3,500 871

1.8 2.8

0.5 3-2

30/37-2kKL

1,950

13

spring

796 1.0

1.3

2^R2 1,950

200

0.5

2^R3 1,9^1 160 flowing

2k3k 1,9^5 - spring

24H5 1,9^1 - spring

30/37-2256M12L.

1,9&
a2,040

26M2 S;^5
26M3 . a2,025

.» -
100
6ko

29.82 78.15
65 65

798 .6

.8

3P/37-27HL
23d 3^31
3kBl 35P1

s2,050 -
a2,0^0 a2,025 a2,015

220 -
-

87 -
79*3 55.2 63.^2

906

.k

30/37-36CL 36d 36KL 36N1
30/38- 3BL
30/38- 3EL 3KL klQ.
kin.
8d

al,990 1,970 a2,005
a2,025 1,928
1,9^3 1,902
2,000
1,91^ 1,932

0*
S%0
16.1 30.0
-
12.8

29.32 62.82 53.9
dry
dry 2.20
117.05
li.82
2.38

762 856 1.0
3,750 20

1.2
5.3

30/38- 8G2
8J1
17KL
19A1 19F1

1,932 1,901
1,950 1,9^9
1,960

.
-
900 3,000 .

.
flowing 22.89 -

7,390

2.6

72

Table 3.- D"e" scription of water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif. Continued Fremont Valley Continued

Well number

*
Altitude of :land surface : (ft above : sea level)
*

Depth of well (ft below
Isd)

30/38-1QL1 19M1 19P1
2031 20B2
30/38-21I2L 21E1 24F1 28D1
3031

»»
1,964 1,937 1,912 1,918
1,898 1,898 1,929 1,905 1,930

845 1,190 5,100
180 80
tm - 550 152 -

30/3S-3QCX
3031 30?1 30Q1 3CKL

1,932 1,943 1,956 ' 1,956 1,943

260 . -80±

30/38-30S2 -
31 -sn jJU? JL .
31G1
32D2
32D2

1,943 . -

37.5 M
1k6o7

30/38-32EL 32G1 34C1 34C2
30/39- 3EL

1,972 -
1,934 1,925 a2,l65

_
*»
367
52
225.0

30/39- 5A1 5KL
6G1 6$L
31/37- 1H1
31/37-10A1
12ML 13A1 13B1 14L1 22QL

2,005
2,053
«.
a2,030
a2,120 a2,l40 a2,130 a2,l40 a2,l85 a2,360

84.5 259.0
11.0
-
320
-
_
-
-

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

:

conductance: Boron : Boron

(micromhos : (ppm) : factor

at 25°C) :

:

2
9
flowing flowing

-

728 0.4

0.5

......

790 1.1

1.4

796 .8 l.o

flowing
spring 13.19 flowing flowing

738
20,000 -

.2
51 -

.3
2.5

spring - 3.31
16.10

«. - .. _ - -' -

-. .

-.

6.^6 -

« ---

.

7,900 3.0

.4

»-

25.14
flowing 8.9
dry
84.M?) 136.S4 . 24.23 dry 61.6

.. 1,900 -

.8 *

.4
-

......
3,080 4.6 1.5 «« » _> ~--

120 80.56 -
156.34
197.1-0 257.72

-
. « 783 .8 1.0 . «-

73

Table 3.- Description of water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif. Continued
Freraont Valley Continued

Well uuinber
31/37-3^41 351S1
31/38-18P1 31C1
32/36-21Q1
32/36-22B1 22B2 22K1 2301
32/37- l*a
32/37- 2S1 kW. 4?1 li-Ql
rua
32/37-lifia 2*rja 2lp<j? 26G1 26G2
32/37-26K1
3^ECL 32/38-10P1
30B1
^PA8-?2N1

Altitude of Depth land surface of well
(ft above (ft below sea level) Isd)

a2,235 a2,320 a2,225 a2,320 a2,olO
a2,720 a2,710 a2,790 a2,660 a2,330
a2,325 a2,390 a2,^05 a2,^00
32,375
a2,400 a2 3 ^5 g2 ^85 a2,405 32,^05
a2,^20
a2,i-75 a2>75 a2,360
a2.V75

-

«. 805

829
53^ 370
1,000 -

-

l&6 > w --

^

. -

-

w
200.0 -

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

:

conductance: Boron : Boron

(micronhos a (ppra) : factor

at 25°C) :

:

201.5*4231.29

«. ' 1,010

1.0

. 1.0

200.^ 372.0

^
-

.. ^

605
dry
300 570.6 232.6

^^

-.

__

M -.

mn
-r . ..

B_
-

238.^1 302.06 307.89 302.98 269.09
. 263.33 . 301.12
365.8
177- 5^ 222.1^
225.05

. -
808 935 M .
-
1,720
-
957

^, __ '
1.3 1.2 -
.5

. -. . .-
1.6 1.3 < -
-
.3

.6 .6

74

Table 3.- Description of water veils IQ part of the western Mojave desert, Calif. Continued

Middle Mojave Valley

(Measurements from May 1953 through August 1954)

Well number

Altitude of Depth land surface of well
(ft above (ft below sea level ) Isd)

8/3- 4m.

2,272

8/4-10-1

-

10-2 -

10-3 ~

10-4 -

29
30 -
30

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

»»

conductance : Boron : Boron

(micromhos : (ppm) : factor

at 25°C) :

»

11.00
16 -
-- " -. -

C980
d2,500
d4,48o d3,430 d2,34o

0.3
1.5 2.5 1-9
1.2

0.3
.6 .6 .6
.5

8/4-10-5 11-1 11-2
12-1
12-2

_ -
-

30 12 d3,570 1.2 3

45

-.

d3,360 1.4

.4

28

m

d3,190 1.2

.4

-30 -

14 -

d9l6 .2 d920 .2

.2
.2

8/4-12-3
3-5-1 ' .15-a
16-1 16-2

. -
-. -

15

5.

d556 .1

.2

30 -

d470 0

0

30 -

d425 .1

.2

96 84

---

26

25

dl,890 1.3

.7

3/4-16-3 16-4 19-1
19-2
20-1

«, -

30 25 dl,48o .5 3

20

12

d2,220 1.3

.6

20 9 dl,120 3 .3

-

-

dl,240

.4

.3

-

-

ai,35o .5

^

8/4-21-1
30-1
8/5-19C1 25-1

-

50 20 dJ79 .2

400

100

d3,l80

.6

- dry

-

-

-

dl,190

.3

8/6-14QL

2,760

300

191.78

8/6-15G1

_M

«-

9/2- 1-1

-

80

-

cl,692

3

4D1 2,176
5m. 2,193

-

27.14 - 27.25 - -

6EL 2,191

29.23

-

c» Analysis rrom uaxnornia division <JJL waoci .ncouu.-n-c.a.

d. Analysis from San Bernardino County Flood Control District.

.3 .2 3
^: .2 -

75

Table 3.- Description of water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif. Continued

Middle Mo^Jave Valley Continued

(Measurements from May 1953 through August 195*0

Well number

Altitude of Depth land surface of well
(ft above (ft below . sea level) Isd)

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

*

conductance : Boron : Boron

(micromhos : (ppm) : factoi

at 25°C) :

9/2-11C1
i17mC1
18J1
1931

.
2,2^5 2,250 2,239 2,255

^ -
131 -

98.85
68.70
73.50
68 71.0*4.

.. -M
c691 0.6 _. . --

0.9 -

9/2-19H1
3^13. 3kML 3^H2 9/3- 12L
9/3- 1J1.
131 2A1201 3H1
9/3- 3J1 3-1 Wl
10P1 10KL
9/3-US1 13HL 13H2
l^DL HH32
9/3-15J1 1501 1502
26EL

2,313 -
2,^95 2,506 2,206
w 2,1.97 2,226 2,238
2,2^3 M
2,292 2,209
2,236 2,226 2,211 2,211
2,227 2,23^ 2,23^ 2,300 2,332

230.0 226.0
lU6
«
200
108
129
125
»
-
-
28
212 -
5^ 1^6
9*
13^
100 M 202

128.30 153-^5 . 159.50 55.70
M 32.35 f63 53..6) 92.50
dry -
80 102.60 26.30
« 60.60 Mi-. 62 29.80
28.20
16.36 17.61
35 135.10 153.70

0638
e60^ -. « d^O
d-2'90
-. -
. d510 el, 350 -
d580 c6l9 -
e592 -
d522
0569 c6l9

A .6 .5 .8 -. _M .1 .2
' -.05 ----
- «. * .1 .2 .9 .7 ---
.2 .3
.1 .2 --
.2 3
-
---
.1 .2 .k .7
.6 1.0

c. Analysis from California Division of Water Resources, d. Analysis from San Bernardino County Flood Control District. ..e. Analysis from Salinity Laboratory, U. S. Department of Agriculture,
Riverside, Calif. f. Record from owner.

Table 3»- Description of water wells in part of the western Kojave Desert, Calif, Continued

Middle Mojave Valley Continued

Well number

(Measurements from May 1953 through August 195*0

Altitude of land surface
(ft above sea level)

Depth of well (ft below
Isd)

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

:

conductance : Boron : Boron

(micromhos : (ppBl) : factor

at 25°C) :

:

9/3-27A1

2,240

mt

19.95

.^^

27A2 2,235

-

23-50 - - -

28A1

2,250

-

27.78

d690 0.04 0.06

28K1

-

* dry

«--

28R1

2,267

-

15.20

521 0

0

9/3-34C1 34E1
34iil 9A-33J1 9/6-34HL

2,310 2,302
»
' 2,490 2,750

104 -. . *, 253.0 106.5

61.40 cl,320

.5

.4

dry . . -

-. . -

*.

1,020 1*1

1.1

249.52 - ~ -

91.55

1,600

1.0

.6

9/6-34*1 10/2-19?!
24-1
30KL 30SH2

2,725 2,217
-
2,178 -

-, -
130 135 -

73-30 34 -

.^

--
e671 .1
--

c542

.2

.1 **-.

10/2-30Q1 30KL 31QL 31KL 32B1

2,181
2,177 2,183 2,183 2,171

n.o
120 -
135

17.30 25.04 35*34 28.05 23*78

d310 .1

.3

d530 .04 .08 ---

---

e376

.1

.3

10/2-32ia 32CJL 33EOL
33J1 §301
10/2-34KL 34KL
, 35KL
10/3- 2J1 2J2

2,172 .
2,179 2,158
-
2,157 2,148 2,128
2,158

_ P. 45 115
.. 80 115

25.50 *
22.66 22*30 -

t

19.67
19.86
15.21 -
56.22

d310 d715
c634 3,610

.1 ..1
.2
9.2
**

.3
.1
.3 2.5 **

c» Analysis from California Division of Water Resources. d . Ana"Ivsls -from San ]BemardiPO Clounty Flood Control District.
Analysis from Salinity Laboratory, U..S. Department of Agriculture,
Riverside, Calif.

Table 3»- Description of water wells in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif. Continued

Middle Mojave Valley Continued

(Measurements from May 1953 through August 195*0

Well number

Altitude of land surface
(ft above sea level)

Depth of well (ft below
Isd)

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

conductance: Boron : Boron

(micromhos : (ppm) : factor

at 23°C) :

*

10/3- 2$L

2 j T! o^QQ-

68

39.57 r,792 5.0 2.8

9HL

O ~] -^1|

-

72.11 - - -

10K1 2A38

-

£5.^2

-.

-

11ML 2,135
lUm. -

-

1*2.50 -

d500

0

0

10/3-15H1
15J1 15Q1 1502
21B1
10/3-21B2 2231 222EL 23H1
2321

2,ll& 2*11*9 2,lp6 2,152 2,160
2,163 -
22,,l166A5-

7-5

52.60 -- - -

80± 1^6.70

- ^7»09

- 33.97

80 10-8'

v30r.9o
5^.25

178 -

e567 - --

.2 -

-

M.. -. -
- '-

.fc -
.. _
-

10/3-23Q2. 23HL 2^21
2*fin
2oBl
10/3-26F1 2651 26?1 26R1 27D1
10/3-27J1
27ML 27E1 2782
27P1

2,170 2,171 2,l6i|-
2,170
2,175 2,186 2,l8l 2,183
-
2,180 -
2,187
22,,119819

130 ~ «. -
-
200 121
118 -

35 48.^-0 1*8.57 -
86.ifO 68.97 29
85.23 50 69.18 83.00

.
-
0518 -
. -
d550 -
.
**

M -
.1
M -
.1 M -
**

M .2 -
^ -. .2
-
^'

c. Analysis from California Division of Water Resources, d. Analysis from San Bernardino County KLood Control District. e. Analysis from Salinity Laboratory, Uo S. Department of Agriculture,
Riverside, Califo

Table 3.- Inscription of water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif.--Continued

Middle Mojave Valley Continued

Well number

(Measurements from May 1953 through August 1954}

**
:Altitude of

Dspth

Depth

Chemical quality

:land surface of well to water Specific :

; (ft above (ft below (ft below conductance : Boron : Boron

: sea level) Isd)

Isd) (micromhos : (ppm) : facto:

**

at 25°C) :

**

10/3-273L 27R1 27E2 27-3
2SA1

28A2 28KL 28C1 28C2 2SF1

10/3-28H1 28H2 23H3 2&J. 28L2

-

10/3-29ML 3QP1 30Q330Q2 30KL

10/3-320L
33AL
33C1 .33HL

10/3-34H1 35d 35HL
35F1

2,186 2,186
-
um
2,165
2,165 2,169
2,174 2,167 2,175
2,204-
2,222 2,219 2,220
2,219 ~
2,199
2,214
2,207
2,203 2,197

280 126 43
75
-60 -
250 . 184 "-
100 121
90 104
80
**
108 94
108 155
n 216 154
130

83.00 100.10
» -
36
^ «
41.72 42.66 48.40
M 45*25 . 49.32 -
63
m
60.80 62.05
65.24 -
63.10
60 70
,. 55 92.40
7M6

cl,500 e551 1,280
tm
2,54o -
5-36
M -.' ^ -
d800 « 968 -
-
532 -
M dl,890
d830 dl,240

. 0.3
.2
1.5
2.2 -
5
M
-~" -
.6 1.3 -
1.1 -
»
. .5 -
.2
.4

«. 0.2
.4
1.2
^
.9 P. .9
«. . -
-
.8 *» 1.3 -
* -
2.1 *
.
*3 -
.2
3

c. Analysis from California Division of Water Resources d. Analysis from San Bernardino County Flood Control District. e. Analysis from Salinity Laboratory, U. S. Department of Agriculture,
Riverside, Calif.

Table 3*- Description of water wells in part of the western Mojave Desert , Calif . Continued

Middle Mojave Valley Continued

Well nuaber

(Measurements from May 1953 through August 195*0

*

Altitude of Depth

Depljh :

Chemical quality

land surface of veil to water : Specific :

:

(ft above (ft below (ft below : conductance: Boron : Boron

sea level) Isd)

Isd) :(micromhos : (ppzn) : factor

: at 25°C) :

:

10/3-35H1 35KL 35B1 35-1 35-2

2,190 2,228 2A96
-

«

75.90 -

--
c63^ 0.2
e^57 .1

.
0*3
.2

10/3-36C1 36P1
10/U~2kjl 25A1

2,181 ~
2,201
2,19^

15^ 102.0 5^.0

56.00 31 57.10 ii-7.25

...... _ ... .,

e» Analysis from Salinity Laboratory, U. S. Department of Agriculture, Riverside, Calif,

Table 3«- Description of water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif.--Continued

Harper Valley

(Measurements from October 1952 through June 195*0

:: : Altitude of : Depth

Depth

Chemical quality

Well :land surface: of well to water Specific :

:

nuniber : (ft above : (ft below (ft below conductance: Boron : Boron

: sea level): Isd)

Isd) (micronhos : (ppm) : factor

** *

at 25°C) :

:

10/3- to 6HL
10/lj~ 3?1 301 8P1
10/5- 3H1 / 3J1
10/6- 351
553.
5S2

2,100 2,OM»2,129
2,13^
2,19^
2,25^
2A55 2,^-75 2A75

p.
«. p. 790
350.0 ' P,
300 3*K>

1*6.20
dry 150.73 153.20 110
223.18 P. 213.00 .. -

e50k
cl,lj-70 P. -

m 0.2 P.
.9
p* P. » P*

0.4 .
.6
P. -

10/6- 523 5Ek5E5
' 5rl 6L1
11/3- m 21R1 28R1 28R3 30A1
H/3-30A2
32P1
32P2 32R1 33H1
11/3-3^51 llA- i*Rl
5-1
6m
13-1

2,^72
2A72
2A75 2,^75
2,500
22,,006832
2,073 2,07^ 2,031
2,033 2,050 2,050
.. -
2,087 2,036
2,051

VK> 262 285 23^ -
123.1 P.
60 -
200
..
35 50 38 206
.. P. 768

195*00
175.23
195 192.00
55.55 55.91* 28.50 26.00 flowing
flowing 9
11 AO 16*
36.73 35.07
28 ^7.55 38

2,120
-
e5^8 d66o
W*
el, 880 el,ii-50

2.9 * f.3«
p* P. .6 3A
A P. . .6
6-.5 1.2

1A P.
.« i.l 5-2
1.3
3-5 .8

c. Analysis from California Division of Water Resources, d. Analysis from San Bernardino County Flood Control District. e. Analysis from Salinity Laboratory, U. S. Department of Agriculture,
Riverside, Calif. f. Record from owner.

81

Table 3.- Description of vater veils in part of ths western Mopave Desert, Calif. Continued

Harper Valley Continued

Well suciber
iiA-i8ci
19EL
19H1 19L1 19KL

(Measurements froia October 1952 through June 195*0

»
Altitude of

Depth

Depth

Chemical quality

land surface of well to water Specific :

:

(ft above (ft below (ft below conductance: Boron : Boron

sea level) Isd)

Isd) (micromhos : (ppm) : factor

i

at 25°C) :

:

2,030
2,060 2,039 2,066 2,046

«.
500 210 350 - -- .-. "

81.30 178.70 108.60 lW-,60 125.00

c3,58o
.

«
1.0 1.4

> 0.3
M

11A-29B1

2,052

500

97-70

29-1

-

253 38 el, 2^0 1.17 1.0

30C1

-

180 1^9-30

*

3021

-

588

fl,5?8

.

3031 -

500

fl,677

-

»

11A-30S2
30?1 3021
31A1
32F1

2,113 -
2,076

' .

' 5-00
300
225

159-20 1^7.20 13^.10
128.10
12^.80

cl,567
dl,500

1.3 .8 " .-
-.9 .6

11A-32L1
33d 339L
35OL
11/5- 231

.
2,110

272
310 350 158.0

131.70
30i68 99.65

c983 cl,^70

.6 1.0 -

.6 .7
_ -

11/5- 2B2

2,110

.

98.82

2DL 13H1

2,145
2,034

« -

132.10 8^.60

13 QL

2,058

285

135.82

..
.

Ito

2,062

153

25.10

7,300 8.7

1.2

11/5-24A1 2^A2 2^EL 2^01 2te

«. «.

300 -

_

250 -

-

250 160*

-

250 1*75

cl,280 "*

"9

.7

c. Analysis from California uLvision 01 webocx- IWBUU-L^GO. d. Analysis from San Bernardino County Flood Control District, e. Analysis from Salinity Laboratory, U. S. Department of Agriculture,
Riverside, Calif. f. Record from owner.

82

Table 3»- Description of water veils in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif. Continued

Harper Valley- Continued

Well number

(Measurements from October 1952 through June 195*0

*
Altitude of : Depth

Depth .

Chemical quality

land surface: of well to water Specific :

:

(ft above : (ft below (ft below conductance: Boron : Boron

sea level): Isd)
*

Isd) (micromhos : (ppm) : factor at 25°C) : . :

11/5-24P1 24KL
35N1 11/6-17L1
17P1

-
2,212 2,576 2,577

444
288.0 ' 618

-
194.10 330.3 , 317.5.

flT6lO fl,507
1,570 -

20

. _-
. 13
-

11/6-20A1 12/4-34C1 32/41-15J1 32/43-2SL1

2,572 2,131
2,775 2,196 .

712 375.0 300 *

247.7 136.55 203.50 spring

1^460 «
992 cl,o4o

35 '
1.4 . .7

24
-.
1.4
.7.

c» Analysis from California Division of Water Resources, f. Beeord from owner.

Table 3«- Description of water wells in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif.--Continued

Cuddeback Valley (Measurements from February 1953 through August 195*0

Well number

*
Altitude of : Depth land surface: of veil
(ft above : (ft below sea level): Isd)

Depth to water (ft below
Isd)

Chemical quality

Specific :

:

conductance: Boron : Boron

(micro-mhos : (ppm) : factor

at 25°C) :

.:

29Ai-3^Kl 30Al-36(2i
30A2- k£L 5KL 5HL

3^75 2,7^7 2^615 2,650 2,650

180
319.2
210.0

38.25 235.30 107.32 122.38 123.02

5^8 0.5

0.9

30A2-10L1 12F1 18PJL 20HL20SL

2,590 2,695 2,635 2,630
_r

130 70.5^

182.30

99.^3

. 91*25

6,881 1.5

.2

30A3- 2j

2,55^

lUl.10 17.85 51.82

673 0 .631 0

Table 3»- Description of water wells in part of the western Mojave Desert, Calif* Continued

Superior Valley

(Measurements from August 1933 through February 195*0

* »
: Altitude of

Depth

Depth

Chemical quality

Well :land surface of well to water Specific :

cuiaber : (ft above (ft below (ft below conductance: Boron : Boron

: sea level) Isd)

Isd) (micromhos : (ppm) : factor

»

at 25°C) :

:

30A5-35P1 3lA5- Id
15X
3lA6- 2ML

3,062
3,03^ 3,026 3,020

lil-5.00 121.20 107.60 106.63 101.70

-

31A&-12P1
126imJ1.
3lA7- 5?J.

3,00^ 3,011
-
3,H3

--
265

87.00
93.20 107.90 253.00

.' '..

m*

g2,519 0.9

oA -

>ls from U» S. Bureau of Land Management,

Table k»- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the part of the Mojave Desert
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Antelope Valley

Well number

Constituents (parts per million)

Silica (Si02 )

Calcium (Ca) Magnesium (Mg) Sodium (Ka) Potassium (K)

Bicarbonate (ECQ-) Carbonate (CO^) * Sulfate (SOu)J Chloride (d) .

.

Nitrate (NO^) Boron (3) J Fluoride (?)

Dissolved solids (Dis. sol.) Hardness as CaCOo (Hardness)

! 10/7-3HL ! 10/7-5A1 ; 11/7-30G1 . »

22
67
19
4oo
.- 7.0
240 360
. 373
10 4.5
1.2
1,54P "

'44
48 7 330 6.0
162 17 271
302
5.0
2.2
JB
«. "

15
49 11
215
6.0
192 223 180
5 1.3 1.6
&0

Specific conductance (So. C»} (micromhos at 25°C; K x 10 )
Percent sodium ($ Na)
pH t , \ Boron factor v Ppa B /
VE.C. x 10^)
Water temperature (°P) Well depth in feet (Depth) Date of collection (Date)

2,070 73 7.7 2.2
-
240 4-22-53

1,810 82 8.4
1.2
-
-

1,190 74 7-8 1.1
675
lf-22-53

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Dese^-t Continued

(For source of analyses see table 3) Antelope Valley Continued:

Well No. ;n/7-32N

;« n/8-2N2 ;ii/8-nD2;» n/8-20H2;« n/8-22Ei

Constituents (ppm)

sm. 58

72

60 66

61

25

Ca

30 38 35

29

Mg

8^0 8.5 .10 9-8 15

8.9

Ka 280 125 128

K 9.0

5.0 10,0

11

6.2

ECO 235
dw
NO, 20 B J 2.7 F 1.2
Dis. sol .1,060
Hardness

201
87 83
2k
.6 9
-5n3o6 -

205 193
93 . * 93 90 . 89 tm «
.6 .5
' 590 ' 568

185 "95
63
..
1.0
513-

207
167 1.3 .6
709 109

Sp. C. % Na pH B. factor
Op
Depth Date

1,530 79 7.8 1.8
72 300 ij-22-53

805
70 8.2
.7
72 hOQ ^-2-53

871 68 8.1
.7

789 69 8.0
.6

71 75 336 2-2^-53 2-2^-53

671
7-7 1.5
69 500 2-2^53

1,150 79 8.0 12.2
70

at

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of vaters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued

(For source of analyses see table 3)

Antelope Valley Continued

WeilKo. 'n/8-24Di ;n/8-26ji ;n/9-22Q!L ;H/9-23B1 ;u/9-3inL ;31/41-3110. * » **

Constituents (ppm)

SiOg 8.0

Ca 32 p.O
Ua 457 K8

ECO . d.

15 357 162 . 239

HO, BJ

3.5 314

F 1.2

Bis. sol. 2,500 Hardness

25
54 12 216 9.0
198
231 192 .
1.3
874 **

58 8.4
38 7.6 36 2.6 82 205 1.3 6.0
166 226
* 10.4 139 176 87 /. 68
14 1.8 0.3 .3
537 598 243

36
76 13 175 7.7
198
111 245
3.6 .3 3
765 243

17
30 5.2 134 6.5
128
154 76 ~ .6
r*
509

Sp. C. % Na PH B. factor
OF
Depth Date

1,990 91 8.8
158
315 4-6-53

1,350 73 7-7 1.0
68.5 400 2-25-53

896 42
7.9 1.3

964 94
8.8 3

69 66.5 200
4-2-52 2-24-53

1,300 60
7-7
.2
68 200 4-5-52

806
76
8.0 .7
71 340 2-17-53

Table *U- Selected cheaical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Antelope Valley Continued

Well No.

Constituents (ppni)
Si02
Ca Mg Na K HC<X
d
NO, B:

50
11
393 7.5
606
12 256
90
2.5 3.3

Dis» sol, Hardness

Sp. C. % Na PH B. factor
°F
Depth Date

1,700 96 8.3 1.9
237.0 5-7-53

Table 4 0 ~ Selected chemical analyses of vaters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Fremont Valley
Well No. '12/10-35P3.J 29/38-27Rl : 29/39-20Ql ;29/39-30Jl ;30/37-12K1J30/37-22A

Constituents (ppm}
Si02 25

Ca 19 Mg 4.0
Na K * 3.0

HCO 210

99 d 70

B3 F
Dis. sol. Hardness

2.5 .1 1.6
-

-
23 7.0 166
207
87 '
5.0 .8 .8
506

f
34 95 96 160
298 698
1.0
9 .5
- --

iuo
50 37
9
227
138 187
5.0 1.3
.8
714

54
53 3.2 734 6.0
196
934
2.0 33 8.0 -'

30
164 4.0
602 4.0
102
999 480
.7 1.8 4.0

Sp. C. % Na PH B factor
Depth Date

738 82 7.5
.1
M
271.8
5-7-53

882 81
-9
spring 4-23-53

1,710 36 8.2 5
72 spring 3-12-53

1,130 . 53 7.7 1.2
75.5 265 4-23-53

3,480 97 8.2 9.5
160 8-19-53

3,500 76 7.5 .5
70
3-H-53

90

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of vaters from the western part of the Mo^aye Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Fremont Valley Continued

Well No. J30/37-24;ii;30/37-24Rl : 30/37-26k;

'/37-36K1 130/38-410.

Constituents (ppm)

Si02 50

Ca 64
Mg .113*
Na
K 3.5

HC03 2?5

d' 48

^03 2.0 3 2.8 F - - 1.6

Dis» scl^ Hardness

»»

40 26
66 67 ' 19 21 ' 80 78 2.6-. . . 3
294 315.
135 109 32 26
2.5 3.7 1.0 .6 1.6 .7
», --

40
57 16 82
176 121 .80
.6 ..47.-
**

31 65

58 148 15 30 89 653
5 10

156 123

128 1,100 103 501

3.5 1.0 .
.2 -

1.5 20 2.4

--

Sp. C» % Na pH B factor
Op
Depth Date

871 7.7 3.2
211 5-7-53

796 41 7.5 1.3
13 5-7-53

798 41 7.6
.8
66.5
3-17-53

762 47 7.7
.9
75
3-11-53

856 49 7-7 1.2
8U5 840 3-H-53

3,750 90 7.8 5.3
8-19-53

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the vestem part of the Mbjave Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Fremont Valley Continued

Well No. ;30/38-8jl :30/38-19ML;30/38-2QBi:30/38-2113L:30/38-2kFi:30/38-32nL

Constituents (ppm) SiOg 75

ko

Ca 59 68
MS Ik
Na 1,630 77 K2

co33 263 28k

535 - 122

Cl

2,130

-26

5.0 1.3 B - 2.6 .k F 1.6 1.6

Dis, sol» Hardness

M *

"

39
69 13 8k 6
300
122 - 33
.7 1.1 .8
«. -

75
73 17 70 6.7
253
13k 33
1.5 .2 1.6
.

trace
1,670 36
3,220 36
61
852 7,320
5.0 51 3.2
-

30
837 370 589 10
155
1,660 2,120
5.0 3.0
.k
M "*

Sp. C.
PH B factor
Op
Depth Date

7,380
' 7-6 .k
82.5 5-6-53

728
7.7 .5
71 1,190 5-13-53

790 kk 7.9
180 3-12-53

738 38 7-6
.3
67
5-6-53

20,000 62 7.9
2.5
550 5-6-53

7,900 26 7.3 .k
ko 5-6-53

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert- Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3) i
Freinont Valley Continued

Well no* 130/38-3^01 130/39-5KL ' 31/37-1^1*31/37-3510.; 32/37-1^*1 ! 32/37-2^2

Constituents to«)

Si02 20

Ca 355 Mfc 9.8 Sa 73
X

HC03 107
3 866 92

K03 3.0 .8 .k

Dis. sol. Hardness

M

2.5
^M52
13
151 .
303 778
5.0 k.6
ij.
^ *

28
62
79 k
16k
119 88
1.0 .8 .1
«.

30
62 Ik 112 ^
123
129 158
2.9 1.0
.3
*

26
29 7
125 k
218
93 79
1.0 1.3
.9
». **

27
15 136
2 218 113
2*0 1.2
.7
*

Sp. C. % Ka PH B factor
Op
Depth Date

1,900
15 7-6
82 367 5-6-53

3,080 66 7.6 1.5
259 5-6-53

783 . 7.6 1.0
3-10-53

1,010
7-9 1.0
78
3-10-53

808 72 7-9 1.6
3-10-53

935 63 7-8 1.3
80.5
3-10-27

Table ^.- Selected chemical analyses of vaters from the western part of the Kojave Desert Continued

(For source of analyses see table 3)

Fremont Valley Continued

Well No. ; 32/38-10?! -32,rjo-jdlu..

Constituents (ppm)
Si02 20
27
MS 13
Na 2p6 K 38

28 '21
8 178
2

CO 3
Cl KOo 3
Bis* sol* Hardness

971
15
-5 .5 .k .»

258 12
93
\6 1.8 ..

.
.-

%Sp.Na'C.
pH B factor
Op
Depth Date

1,720 . 78 7.7
.3
200 5-7-53

95a7
8.6 .6
M
3-10-53

'

Table ^.- Selected chemical analyses of waters frpia_the western part of the Mojave Desert- Continued

(For source of analyses see .table 3)

Middle Kojave Valley

: 9/3-nEi :Well No. ; 8/3-Jna 1 9/2-17E1 ; 9/2-19H1 ; 9/3-1HL

9/3-13R1

»

Constituents (ppm)
27Si02 - - - 20.8

Ca Mg

.84
19

28
7

1I1f

47 7

46 9

Ha 120 115 135 50 56

K 3.5 3.7 2.6

-
45 8 90 3.0

ECO-, C03 SO£ Cl
NOo B F
Dis. sol» Hardness

273
166 111
7.9 .3 .9
668

229
10431'
2.0 .6 4.o
450

22k
85 ifl
2.5 .k
2.0
402 *

220
35 34
6.6 .1 .7
P»

205 212
41 78 47 , 62
5.0 0
.2 .1
.6 1.2
* . 4'0« 2

Sp. C. % Na PH B factor
°F
Depth Date

980 kQ
7.9 .3
29 1^20-54

691
70 8.6
.9

638
97 8.0 .6

460 438.2 *
.2

580
45 7.9
3

619
58 7.7
.2

» 146 28 212 5-6-5^ 4-20-54 3-27-52 2-3-52 4-20-54

Table H.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued

(For source of analyses see table 3)

Middle Mojave Valley -Continued

: 9/3-26EL ;*
Well No. [ 9/3-2HtJl

9/3-28R1 ; 9/3-3HC1 ! 9/3-3HE1 ! 9/6-3HB1

**

Constituents (ppia)

Si02 -

19 Mg. ^ . 3 Na 115 K 3.7

HC03 215

SCk 72 ~d HO

NO 0 B J .H
2.0

Dis» sol. 373

Hardness

"

-
20
6
123
203
117 ~' HO
6.0
.6
H20

29 -
HO Ill 10 19 60 1.9 2.5
173 .,292
. 67. . 256 39 127
3.H H.H 0 .5 .H .7
. 782 .- .

37
70 19 125 2.H
268
153 95 -
2.6 1.1
.8 -.

-
22
5.5 312
5.6
138 .
316 2HH
1.0 1.0 .H
. .

Sp. C. % Na
B factor
Op
Depth Date

569
a 7.9
.7
H2^5H

619
79 8.0 1.0
202 H-20-5H

52l' 50 7.H 0
5-26-5H

1,320 H7 7.5 .H
10H
H-13-5H

1,020 ' 52
7.5 l.l
69
5-7-5H

1,600 . 89 7.3 .6
106.5 5-15-53

Table ^.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued

(For source of analyses see table 3)
Middle Mojave Valley Continued

Well No. [10/2-30Q1 ;iO/2-33Ql I10/2-35R1'! 10/3-2J1 ! 10/3-2001 ;i.0/3-lto

»**

*

Constituents (prpm)

-Si02

17

Ca 28 Mg 3.0 Ka 36 K

HC03 . SO,3 d

1*
17 23

2.5 3 .1 F . .6

Dis. soi» Hardness

-

Sp. C. % Ha PH B factor
Op
Depth Date

310
7.6 .3
3-n13o-52

-
50 16
3-1
298
66 39
16 .1
1.0
-
715 59
a *
115 6-53

-"
56-
9 68
201
28
1.5 .2
398
63^ 7.7 .3

29
22 823
3.2 223 602 807
.3 9.2
i
3,610 90 2^5

18
27 2.1 36^ 2.2
1A .
265 321
0
5.0 8.0
1,790 92 8.0 2*8

80 68 12-15-51 12-1^-53 "12-1^53

31
60*
187 37
3.5 0
.6
-
500 52 8.0 0
0*
2-6-52

97

Table ^,- Selected chemical analyses of -waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Middle Mojave Valley Continued

Well No. ;iO/3-2^Kl :iO/3-27GL ;iO/3-27R2 J10/3-28AL |lO/3-29i^a. ;iO/3-30Q2

**

*

*

Constituents (ppm)

Si02

-

27 -

k6 . 50

35

Ca 37 173 117 19 18

Jfe 3-7 9.5 26 27 12

tfa 62 68 103

132 182

K 1.0

3.9 3.9

2.9

HCO-, 168 196 280

179 . 196

C03^

"59

52 - '271

301 - 111

179

52 1*8 185 Ik-2 72 90

BJ

2.5 2.0 11

3.6 2.0 0

.1 .1 .3 1.5 .6 1.3

F .5 .7

0 .9 1.2

Dis. sol* 305
Eariness

-. 1,180

- "- ' -

Sp. C. % Na PH B factor
Depth Date

518 - . 550 50 7.* 8.0
.2 .2
121
li-13 5* 2-6-52

1,500 . 30
.2
126

1,2i8n0
7-3 1.2
69 75 5-25-54-

800 75 8.1
.8
100 2-6-52

968 85 7.3 1.3
70.5 ICfc 4-22-5^

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)

Middle Mojave Valley Continued

Well No. ; 10/3-330. ; io/3-35ci;
Constituents 1[ppmj

_

Si02 57 22
Ca 27 2k6 tig 8.5 38 Na 71 170 K 3-3

HCO^ 159 371

CO-

Qf\ 63 . ^27 . ......

Cr

253 ; .

"

"

E3 F

0 17

1..14

.5 5

Dis. sol. Hardness

J.

«"
-

V-

Sp. C. % Na PH B factor
Op
Depth Date

532 . 62.
7*3 2.1
71.5

1,890
33 3
216 3-4-52

98 .

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Harper Valley

Wen No. ! 10A-8P1 ! 10/6-5E3 ! 11/3-30A1I 11/3-32P1J H/3-33HLI 11/4-19EQ.

Constituents (ppm) Si02 -

5T 36A 35 34.8 35.2

Ca

19 ^3

1.72 47

22.8 155

%

4 13

.52 14

5.68 30

Na

310 . 426

1^3

91

72.2 ' 616

K

5*9 3

1.40 .9

.90 11

CECOO.*
so|

13^ 173 -

3C& 219 11 39.0 "318 . : 36.7

224
77

d ' 305 335 32.0 73

167
49.0 33.0

262
248 982

KO^

6.3 20

3.97 1.20 0

9.8

3- .9 2.9 3.4 .4 .6 1.4

F 1.0 1.6 1.60 .4 1.2 0

Dis» soU 860

1,360

426

53

Hardness

* -.

Sp. C. $ Na PH B factor
Op
Depth Date

1^70 90 8.0 .6

2,120
85 7.8 IJ*

T90 1AO 6-15-53 4-17-53

660 97 9*2 5.2
64 200 2-6-52

54 7.6
73 35 6-54

464 68 7.5 1.3
69.5 206 5-5-54

72 7.8
71
6-2291-054

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued

(For source of analyses see table 3)
Harper Valley Continued

*.

*.

*T - r 1 nL 1<(> / -f Lr«j f *** "j ^^AV CZ» £ £ / ^r*1*^ j |j T*aV

,* _l . J. / ^T** j ^-J_fJL JLJL/ ^r ** j j \jJL

^# JL.L/ ^**J r,t^L JLwL»/ *D**i^^Wjr^L

Constituents (ppra)

SiOg -

Ca 66
Mg 12 Ka 290 K 5.9

co33 220
so?
Cl 280

B^

10.9 1.3

F .8

Dis. sol. 1,080
Hardness

78
46
260
173
240 235
7.9 .9 .8 952'

-
36 10 180 4.6
166
155 151
9.4 .6 - 1.0
688 .6

-
40 . 5 290 5.9
141
207 275
11 1.0 1.2
905 .8

66
170 56 1,510 3.6
486 .
1,220 1,590
10.2 8,7 .8
-

-
18 4 290 3.8
237
129 243
13 9
1.2
875

Sp. C. % Na PH B factor
Op
Depth Date

1,570
7-3 .8
73 500 6-12-53

1,500 80 7.8 .6
300 2-6-52

983 69 7.5
.6
272 6-12-53

1,470
90 8.4 .7

7,300 84 1^2

77 310 153
-6-16-54

1,280 91 7.7 .7
250 -6-12-53

Table 4.- Selected chemical analyses of waters from the western part of the Mbjave Desert-^Contlnued

(?or source of analyses see table 3)

Harper Valley Continued

weii NO. ; n/6-i7Li;n/6-20Ai ;« 32Ai-i5Ji.:32A3-28Li :t

Constituents (ppm)
SiOg 22 19 31 -
Ca 27 19 35 Mg 7.0 10 8 7 Na 269 259 162 188 K 2 4.8

COo 3
SOh 138
d

BNO--,* 20 F .8

Dis* sol. 1,020

. Hardness

95

178
35 0 90

210 138 95
9.7 ilo
--

122
3Q1 99
2.4 2.-67'
745

Sp. 0. 5^ Na PH B factor
°F
Depth Date

1,570
~8.2 13

1,460
"7.8 24

992 75 7.7

1,040
75 7-8 ' .7

618 712 300 spring 1950 1950 3-1-53

102

Table ^.- Selected chemical analyses of vaters from the western part of the Mojave Desert Continued
(For source of analyses see table 3)
Cuddeback and Superior Valleys
Well No. ,:30Al-36ca : 3oA2-2oia; 3oA2-2to;30A3-2DL 31/^0 loJGL

Constituents (ppm)

SiO 2
Ca
Na K

13
23 5*6 100 3.0

HCOo 151C03 10
SOi,.
Cl 61

K03 BF " .'

.. .5

Dis* sol. 381
Hardness

-
85 866 15
88
56 2,310
5.0 1.5
.8

7.3
12 .6
128 12
157 15 20
.3
0 .8
.. -

22 -

5-6 78
2.0
261
17 61
3
0 .8
_'

52 300
.13
120 156 "
672
13 9 2.0
1,720 "*

Sp. C. % Na PH B factor
Op
Depth Date

5^8 72
»9
72
319.2
2-17^53

6,880 55 8.0 .2
70
^29-53

673 . 83
8.6
0
8-19-53

631 53 7.9
0
8-19-53

2,520 56 7.2 **
265 1-12-51*-

