GEOLOGY 02 IH3
SMALL HCBE GASYOH, DALY'S SPUR, C3DAR GSSSE, AHD flflLL AR5A.S,
SCUTHW3ST2RN M03T.A2TA
Preliminary Eeport
By
Wayne Bis sell Lowell*
During the summers of 19^6 and 19*4-7 several areas in southwestern Montana were investigated to determine the area! extent and structure of the Phosphoria and adjacent formations as well as the quality and thickness of the phosphate "beds in the Phosphoria formation. This work is part of a study of the phosphate deposits of southwestern Montana which is one phase of a program "by the . Department of the Interior to investigate the natural resources of the Missouri River Basin. The geology of the Small Horn Canyon, Daly*s Spur, and Cedar Creek areas (pi. l), and of the Dell area (pi. 2) was mapped in as much detail as the aerial photographs permitted; the geology of some intervening areas was mapped by reconnaissance. In the area west of Daly's Spur and U. S. Highway No. 91, the geology was mapped "by plane table and aerial photographs, section corners being used as control points. Topography was not mapped.
Previous geologic investigations of the Phosphoria formation of this area were undertaken "by C. F. Bowen, I/; D. D. Condit, 2/; and A. P. Butler, Jr.,
I/ Bowen, C. F. , Phosphatic oil shales near Dell and Dillon, Beaverhead County, Montana: U. S. Geol. Survey Bull. 66l-I, pp. 315-328, 1918.
2] Condit, D. D. , Oil shale in western Montana, southeastern Idaho, and adjacent parts of Wyoming and Utah: U. S. Geol, Survey Bull. Jll-3, piD«
1919.
G. W. Chesterman (19^, unpublished).
GEOGRAPHY
Most of the mapped area is in the southern part of the tfillis quadrangle and includes T. 9 S*. , Rs. 9-11 W. ; sees. 19-23, 26-36, T. 8 S. , R. 9 W. ; sees. 23-26, 3^-36, T. 8 S., R. 10 V. ; sees. 5-8, T. 10 S. , R. 10 tf, ; and sees. 1«U, 10-12, T. 10 S., R. 11 X The Dell area is 20 to 25 miles by highway south of the main area, and outside the limits cf the Will is quadrangle.
* Geologist, U« S. Geological Survey and Professor of Geology, Montana State . University,

07-/0

Contents

^ Ihgo

Introduction

. . . . - .......

Geography : - -

- - --

Stratigraphy Sedimentary rocks- ----- - -

--

Lodgopolo and Mission Canyon limestones

-

.Amsdon formation-

. i-

Quadrant quartzite

-

-

Phosphoria formation- - - -j

Dinwoody formation -- - -

-

Thaynos limestone -

-

Ellis formation

Kootonai formation

--

.

Early Tortir.ry conglomerate -

Tortir.ry igneous rocks - - -

--

Extrusive rocks ---

-- -

Intrusive rocks-

....................

Structure - f -

-.

-

Small Eorn Canyon aroa - -

.

Daly's Spur aroa

--

-

Doll area Codnr Crook area- -

.. . -

i 1 2 2
2 2 3
U 1* ij. i}. 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 7

Illustrations
Plato
1. Preliminary Geologic map of part of S.W. J and S.E. J of Willis quadrangle, Boavcrhoad County, Montana
2» Geologic map of Doll area, Bcc.vorhcad County, Montana

TT. S. Highway Ho. 91 and the Oregon Short line "branch of the Union Pacific Bailway cross the main area along the Beaverhead Valley from Barret ts to Armstead and pass a few miles east of the Dell area. Stock-camp supply roads and trails are passable "but slow routes to nearly all parts of the country adjacent to main roads*
The drainage is well developed, but only a few streams are perennial. Beaverhead River and Horse Prairie Creek generally flow through wide, flat valleys, but the valleys are mostly narrow in the area under immediate consideration. Tributary streams, mostly intermittent, have eroded deep Y-shaped valleys and canyons, resulting in rough, mountainous topography. The relief seldom exceeds 1,000 feet in most of the area, but is 2,000 feet or more in the vicinity of Dixon Mountain and Timber Butte in tho Dell area.
Grasses «^d sage brush commonly grow where soil mantle has accumulated. Slopes underlain by Quadrant quart site or covered by talus derived from the Quadrant usually support a growth of evergreens. Elsewhere trees are present only in small patches on north slopes of hilly areas.
STIUTISiAPEY i The rocks in the area are marine and continental sedimentary formations, volcanics, and an intrusive-metamorphic complex. The sedimentary formations, representing all of the geologic periods from the Carboniferous to Tertiary, are briefly described below.
Sedimentary rocks
and Mission Canyon limestones. The Lodgepole and Mission Canyon limestones of Mississippian age are the oldest Paleozoic rocks exposed in the mapped area. These formations crop out in two north-south strips, one between Small Horn Canyon and Daly's Spur and another between Daly*s Spur and Cedar Creek where they underlie most of the high country immediately west of U. S. Highway Uo. 91 f*w Pipe Organ Lodge to Armstead.
These Mississippian limestones are gray on fresh surface, light gray on weathered surface, fine-grained, fossiliferous, and resistant to erosion. Three mappable units are recognized: the lowermost, mapped as the Lodgepole limestone, consists of fossiliferous limestone beds 1/U foot to 2 feet thick which are characteristically contorted into minor complex folds; the middle unit consists of massive beds and rarely shows structure; the uppermost unit consists of beds 1 to ^ feet thick. The two upper units were mapped as the Mission Canyon limestone. Hone of the units has been measured.
Amsden formation. The Ansden formation (Mississippian and Pennsylvanian) consists of carbonate rocks, cherts, sandstones, and shales. The beds aro gray, light brown, and dusky red, and contrast with the underlying gray Mississippian limestone and the overlying light-gray Quadrant quart zite. Fossils are abundant in some exposures. The Aasden formation is approximately 700 feet thick in the Dell area and about 150 feet thick in the Cedar Creek area.

Quadrant quart zite* The Quadrant quart zite (Pennsylvanian) consists of massive teds of light-gray, fine- and medium-grained siliceous sandstones and quart zi tea, Locally, crossbedding is conspicuous, and a fev talus "blocks contain ripple marks. Approximately UOO feet of the upper part of the Quadrant quart zite is exposed in the cliff at Daly f s Spur, and a complete section of approximately 2,000 feet is exposed in Big Sheep Canyon in the Dell area. The Quadrant has "been eroded into prominent ridges that may serve to locate the position of the phosphatic shale member of the Phosphoria formation. Commonly quart zite talus slopes cover much or all of the formations that crop out at lower elevations.
Phosphoria formation. The stratigraphy and lithology of the Phosphoria formation (Permian) vary considerably within the mapped area. In the Dell area the Phosphoria formation has been divided into five mappable units including two phos-nhatic zones. These five members are shown on the geologic map (pi. 2) as Ppa, -b, -c, -d, -e, (base to top) where mapped as individual units*
The lower siliceous and carbonate member (Ppa) consists of massive beds of carbonate rock, sandstone, silt stone, and chert. Most of the beds are light gray. The beds are 1 to 16 feet thick and are less resistant to erosion than the underlying Quadrant quart zite. The basal bed is carbonate rock. The upper 111 feet consist of pale reddish-brown and dusky-yellow silt stone and gr=.y limestone* The member is 3^7 feet thick.
The lower phosphatic shale member (Ppb) consists of 5^ feet of phosphate rock, mudstone, and chert. The basal 3 feet contain 6.3 fee-t of phosphate rock.
The upper siliceous and carbonate member (Ppc) consists of 200 feet of chert, sandstone, and carbonate rock in massive beds 2 to ^ feet thick.
The upper phos^ohatic shale member (Ppd) is conspicuous throughout the ^mapped area except in sec. 3, T. 10 S. , E. 11 V. t where it was not recognized with certainty. The -member consists of mudstone, phosphate rock, and thin beds of limestone. Light gray, medium gray, and grayish black are the dominant colors. Some of the grayish-black mudstones are petroliferous. In the Dell area the member is 83 feet thick and contains a phosphate zone from 5 feet to 11.3 feet above the base.
The top member (Ppe) consists of 1^8 feet of cherty and non-cherty mudstones and silt stones in the Dell area.
In the Daly ! s Spur area (pi. l) the lower siliceous and carbonate member (Ppa) is 30 feet thick and the lower phost>hatic shale member (Ppb) is 5 fsot thick. Members Ppa and -b are too thin to be mapped separately and, therefore, are included in member Ppc. Member Ppc consists of chert and sandstone and is 90 feet thick. Member Ppd is 5^.5 feet thick and similar to member Ppd of the Dell area. A phosphate zone occurs from 3.8 fast to 12.8 feet above the base of the member. The chert and quart zite member (ppe) consists of alternating massive beds of nodular chert and quart zites. The dominant color of unweathered rock is gray, and of weathered rock yellowish brown. This member is 136 feet thick at Daly's Spur.

In the Cedar Creek area members Ppa, -c, -d, and -e are similar in lithology to their equivalents in the Daly's Spur section* The lower phosphatic shale member (Ppb) has not been recognized within the area, and the upper shale member (Ppd) appears to be absent in sec. 3, T, 10 S., B. 11 tf.
Dinwoody formation* The Dim-/oody formation (Lower Triassic) includes shales, sandstones, and limestones. Light yellow and brown are the dominant colors in fresh exposures. A ohocolate-brown color characterizes weathered rode. Pour mappable units are recognized. The basal member (2J?da) consists of shales with a few thin-bedded sandstones and limestones. This member grades upward into thin-bedded limestone (ORdb). The overlying member (5? dc) consists of reddish shales. The top member (Ufcdd) consists of thin-bedded limestone similar to Hfrdb ?nd grades upward into olivo-brown shales. The Dinwoody formation is 700 to 800 feet thick in the mapped area .and is apparently conformable on the underlying Phosphoria formation.
/
Fossils are abundant in the limestone beds. Disc-shaped crinoid columnals and small black Terebratula shells are fairly abundant in the basal beds. A few ammonites have been found in the lower sends tone beds; star-shaped crinoid columnals occur in the upper beds.
Thaynes limestone. The Thaynes limestone (Lower Triassic) consists of two mappable units, er.ch about 80 feet thick. The lower unit (URta) consists of light-gray sandstone, and the up-oer (3fe tb) consists of pinkish-gray limestone. Star-shaped crinoid columnals are common, and small ammonites are locally abundant in the uprier unit. In the Dell area the topmost beds consist of nodular chert.
Bllis formation. The Ellis formation (Jurassic) has been identified only in the Dell area where it is 3^0 feet thick and consists of sandstones, limestones, mudstones, and shales. The basal bed is a sandstone, which locally contains a chert breccia derived from the underlying chert nodules of the uppermost Ihaynes, The formation is dominantly gray and weathers yellowish gray and yellowish brown. Fossils are abundant and include crinoid columals (jPentacrinus), pelecypods, and gastropods. The Sllis formation is apparently conformable on the Thaynes limestone.
gootenai formation. The Kootenai formation (Lower Cretaceous) consists of a basal conglomerate or conglomeratic sandstone overlain by sandstones, shales, and limestones. The basal conglomerate and sandstone contain abundant black chert pebbles and grains, respectively. The conglomerate grades laterally and vertically into conglomeratic sandstone. The sandstones are light gray and dark greenish gray (pale reddish brown whon weathered). Overlying the sandstone are shales that weather to a pale, reddish-brown mantle. Hear the top of the formation two massive, gray, gastropod-bearing limestone beds are present; gastropods are particularly abundant in the upper bed.
3arly Tertiary conglomerate. A boulder, cobble, and pebble conglomerate is exposed in many squrjre miles of the napped area. It is approximately 1,000 fett thick in Clark Canyon (sec, 35, T. 9 S,, R. 1C tf.) and at least 5,000 feet chick r,t McKnight Canyon in the Dell area. The age of the conglomerate is tentatively considered to be early Tertiary.
u. s. e

In the Dell area the conglomerate formation can "be divided into three mappable units (pi. 2): a lower conglomerate unit (Tea) at least 2,000 feet thick, a middle unit (Tcb) of limestone, sandstone, tuffaceous shale, and some 1- to U-foot beds of conglomerate, and an upper unit of conglomerate (Tec).
The two conglomerate units consist mostly of rounded and subrounded limestone pebbles, cobbles, and boulders. Hounded and subrounded quartzite fragments are present almost without exception and locally make up as much as 95 percent of the conglomerate. Quartzite fragments are white, grey, pink, and red. Some boulders have been derived frcm a pre-existing conglomerate, and probably most of the quartzite fragments were derived from pre-Cambrian rocks not now exposed in the area. Limestone fragments were derived mainly from the gray Madison limestone. Mantlg, developed upon the conglomerate in light red, gray, and pale yellowish orange. The light-red color is characteristic of the conglomerate consisting mostly of quartzite fragments* The gray and yellow colors develop upon weathered conglomerate consisting mostly of limestone fragments.
The limestone is massive, light gray and light brownish gray, fine-grained and locally concretionary and sandy. The concretions are as much as 2 inches in diameter, and on weathered surfaces exhibit a striking concentric banding. A few poorly preserved gastropods have boon found in the limestone.
In the ¥illis quadrangle, the early Tertiary (?) conglomerate unconformably overlies all the formations from the £odgepole to the Kootenai. An angular unconformity between the conglomerate and the Eootenai fermation is exposed near tho mouth of Grasshopper Creek (SE l/^ sec. 26, T. 8 S., H. 10 W.), and one between the conglomerate and Mississippian limestone is exposed en the west side of U. S. Highway 2Jo. 91 aear the south line of sec. 32, T. 9 S., R. 10 ¥ Tertiary lavas overlie the conglomerate from Grasshopper Creek to Pipe Organ Lodge.
The conglomerate has been folded and is overthrust by the Madison limestone. One overthrust parallels U. S. Highway Ho. 91 on the west side and extends from sec, 9 to sec. 32, T. 9 S., R. 10 W. Another overthrust can be followed for more than 2 miles at the head of McKnight Canyon in the Dell area.
Tertiary igneous rocks
Extrusive rocks. Rhyolite, andesite, basalt, and tuff comprise Tertiary extrusive rocks in the mapped area. All are included under a single symbol on the accompanying map.
Intrusive rocks. A metaiaorphic complex that includes well-stratified beds of marble, quartzite, and schist extends northward across T. 9 S., R. 11 W. These metamorphic rocks are intruded by a coarse-tsxtured granitic rock consisting of quartz, feldspar, and muscovite. A hornblende gneiss surrounds the granite and apparently is in contact with Mississippian limestone which is slightly altered and contains snail aggregates tf mineralized reck near the contact. The granite and hornblende gneiss are tentatively considered to be early Tertiary.

STRUCTURE
The sedimentary rocks of the area have been deformed into open and closed folds, and have been faulted The folding and faulting become more complex to the 7rest. Most folds trend north and many have been overturned to the east, Complex high-angle faulting and overthrusting have occurred in various parts of the mapped area.
Small Horn Canyon area " The Snail Horn Canyon area, along the east side of T, 9 S., R, 9 W,, is accessible by road from Dillon or Barretts. The Mesozoic and Paleozoic rocks of this area have been folded into the northtrending anticline at Small Horn Canyon and the syncline at Sheep Creek, both of which plunge northward. The west limb of the anticline and the east limb of the synclino have beon deeply dissected by Small Horn Crook and Sheep Crook, respectively, Tho oast limb of tho anticline (lino between sees. 11-12, 13-14) has boon ovorturnod and possibly faulted* Small Horn Canyon may parallel a fault, as tho crock has cut into the structure in an unusual manner and tho Quadrant quartzito at the mouth of tho canyon is offset parallel to the canyon*
Tho north-facing slope from Sheep Crook to tho warm spring in sec, 28, T. 8 S., R. 9 "W,, is apparently tho continuation of tho oast limb of tho Shoop Crock synclino -which has boon bent to tho northwest. On this structure, striko faults have cut out some bods and possibly one or moro formations. Dip faults and oblique faults have offset formations a few to many tens of feet. In places the sandstone and quartzito bods of tho lower Hiosphoria and Quadrant formations have boon silicified and sparsely impregnated with pyrito,
Tho upper phosphatic shale member of tho Phosphoric, formation can bo followed by outcrop, float, anc1 topography for at loast 5 miles on tho flanks of the Small Horn Canyon anticline and Sheep Crock sync line.
Dalyts Spur area, The Daly*s Spur area is mostly -within sec. j69 T, 8 S., R. 10 1/V., on the west side of U. S. Highway No. 91» The west-dipping Mesozoic and Paleozoic rocks of this area crop out on a north-trending homocline \vhich has been deeply eroded and partly buried by early Tertiary (?) conglomerate and Tertiary lavas. They are exposed for about 1 mile along U. S. Highv/ay Ho, 91 between Grasshopper Crook and Daly's Spur, and are overlain by Tertiary lavas north of Grasshopper Crook and by conglomerate and lavas vrest and south of Daly's Spur, Tho bods striko N, 6°-12° E, and dip 35°-65° W. Tho uppor phosphatic shale member of the Phosphoria formation can bo traced for half a mile north of Daly's Spur and reaches an altitude of 200 foot above tho valley floor. Just oast of Daly f s Spur station the Dinrroody formation is faulted dorm against tho Quadrant quartzito.
Doll area. Tho Doll area in tho Tondoy Mountain rango south of the Willis quadrangle includos sees. li|.-l5, 21-23, 26-28, 33-36, T. 12 S., R. 10 W.j tho eastern trro-thirds of T. 13 S., R. 10 W.3 sees. 19-20, 29-31, T. 13 S., R. 9 W.; and sees, 2-3, 10-11, T. lij. S., R. 10 T,'. It nay bo reached by road from Kidd or Doll.
Mosozoic and Fal-ozoic rocks are exposed in a north-trending synclino v.rhich v;hich is deeply eroded on tho Trost and covered by the early Tertiary (?) conglomerate and later Tertiary sodinonts and lavas.

Both limbs of the syncline are characterized by complex faults, A high-angle normal fault parallels the Tendoy Mountain front on the east. Along this fault the Thaynos limestone has been displaced downward against the Phosphoria formation between Little Wafer Canyon and Dry Canyon and against the Quadrant quartzite south of Dry Canyon, The west limb of the syncline is complexly faulted into small blocks^, and many beds and some entire unita of the various formations have boon eliminated* Thrust faulting is closely associated -with the high-angle fault zone of the west limb, which -nay bo the root zone of the thrust faulting as both fault typos are closely associated vrith the overturned west limb. The Mississippian limestones form the topnost plate in the ovorthrust segment. This plate rests on the Quadrant, Riosphoria, Dirrwoody, and Thaynes formations, and cc.rly Tertiary (?) conglomerate. These formations pass under the Mississippian limestones north of Little Water and UcKnight Canyons and reappear in the area just south of Horse Prairie Valley.
The two phcsphatic shale zones can bo traced by outcrop, float, and topography for more than 5 miles in the Doll area,
Cedar Crook area, The Cedar Crook area includes sees, 13-3^, T. 9 S,, R. 11 W,, and sees, 1-U and 10-12, T. 10 3., R. 11 W., and can bo reached by stock-camp supply roads that branch from a county highway west of the mapped area.
Paleozoic and Mcsosoic rocks crop out on the limbs of several northtrending asymmetrical anticlines and synclir.es, Tho bods on the or.st limbs of the anticlines are almost vertical or slightly overturned to the onst; those on the west limbs range in dip from 20o to 90° W, Locally the structures are doubly plunging* The folds are tightly compressed and faulted in sees, 16-17 and 28-29, T, 9 S., R. 11 Yf., and are almost recumbent in sec, 20.
Tho bods are displaced by severe. 1 high-angle normal faults and by two low-angle thrust faults, Tho high-angle normal faults include both strike and transverse types. On the strike fr.ults the' displacement is not largo, but on tho transverse fault in sees, 2-3 and 11, T, 10 S,, R, 11 W., a displacement of approximately 2,000 foot is indicated* A thrust fault of largo displacement occurs northor.st of tho Cedar Crock area. Along this thrust Mississippian limestone has overridden early Tertiary (?) conglomerate.
Only one thin phcsphatic shr.lc zone wr.s recognized in this area and in most places it was too thin to bo mnppcd as a separate unit. It is immediately beneath tho upper siliceous member of tho Phosphoria formation.

