UNITED STATES DEPAROMENT OF THE INTERIOR GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
PRELIMINARY REPORT ON LANDSLIDES IN A. PART OF THE ORINDA FORMATION, CONTRA COSTA COUNTY, CALIFORNIA By
Dorothy H. Radbruch and Louise M. Weiler

63-HZ.
Open-file report

1963

^

This report is preliminary and has not been edited or reviewed for conformity with Geological Survey standards

CONTENTS

Introduction ................

Purpose of report ...........

Acknowledgments ............

Method of collecting and compiling data

Presentation of data. .........

Geography. .................

Topography. ..............

Climate and vegetation. ........

Culture

...'......

Geology of the Orinda Formation, ......

Definition and boundaries .......

Lithology ...............

Structure arid age ...........

Landslides ............*......

Description ..............

Causes of landsliding .........

Prevention of landsliding .......

References cited ..............

Appendix .............. ....

Page
1 1 3 3 4 6 6 6 7 7 7 8 12 13 13 15 30 33 35

ILLUSTRATIONS

Page

Plate 1.
Figure 1 2
; 3 4

Preliminary map showing location of some landslides

in a part of the Orinda Formation, Contra Costa

County, California ................ In back

Index map of part of California showing area

covered by plate 1 ................ Idealized longitudinal cross section showing parts

2

'of a landslide.' . . vvi v . . .... .......

5

Size analysis graph of shale from the Orinda Formation 11

Generalized sketches showing classification of land-

slides according to physical shape and complexity . 14

Sketch showing idealized relationship -of bedding ^'.;,j; and jointing to land surface. /..;" ,':'": ."' ' ^.:.5: .'"; ^ ./v.-,;'v.i; > .

19

'Simplified stereographic diagram showing poles of § : ':~': joint planes and" bedding "plane's " :. '''^ ^:A'i-^?-£.'&^2'-'^'-'r^^'' 21

. Sketches illustrating four stages in the development "

IlM' of:\valleys 'in the Orinda T?Qrtt&t±cm.''':'-+-y^^[$^

25 ,

.TABLES

Table 1^ Data on selected landslides in a part .of the Orinda

^^fe^^-^fl^^^^tlou,"' Contra Costa County, California .:; . » "

SaS$2 ./-^'Distribution of 195 landslides according to

-

f'K ;?$$$j££^ ^:"':'geologic^ setting "and exposure. /./';. ;.r ;: v.^'.-/"..;" ;'.^' . .

PRELIMINARY REPORT ON LANDSLIDES H A B CONTRA COSTA COCSTI,

THE ORINDA FORMATION,

By Dorothy H. Radbruch aad

* Weiler

Purpose of
Xhi. p'reliminary report presents tfe. resets of sliding inthe Orinda Formation. The collected from 195 landslides within « «« of

Bay in

studied.) Although landslides can be "~~ r_~are nowhere more abundant

formation in the San Francisco Bay «W-^ tlcm> ^ purpose

for an area of given extent than in tta ~?* general factors involved

of this study was to obtain an indication or ox. g

sreoloeic

in the landsliding in the Orinda Foraaciaa, including the geologic

controls involved in the landsliding.

Rapid urbanization of the San ^^f^f^ tranche' 3 Landslides development of much land formerly used ax t*~^ obstacle to rural in the hills underlain by the Ortada «*££. £ urban utilization, use of the land, but they may present.^^^^ tnformation to aid in The present study is designed to P videJ« course of urban solving engineering problems which may
development.

,-The area studied for underlain by the Orinda Formation area; shown on plate 1 were examined. of the factors involved in .obtained from this study.

. ___ . Formation were "-t>f^'?<5,-^
.--U..v-:''£;*.)'.':;','i^^'S^JiW'^*:''*f'c*^^i!,^ft>^:V^b*-^^^;^ir^^-S:';'*f^e:'^,;^^|*A*:*^1;--^!."*--v'o?.. :.1^
: '-' - ' ' -" ' ' ^ ' 'iV ^^-'*' -v^-i.-i'-vv^'.^j^^/''?::^^^)^^

i23°oo*
3a°40§

I22°00'

I2I°20* 38°4O

38°OO'

37° IQ*
121° 20
,:'^S.|;-^;^-:v£-r""v' c-*>.,:' -' |fi| Figure 1.-Index map of part of California showing area covered by Plate 1.
Tliis map is preliminary ami \\-AA not been edited or reviewed for conformity with U.S. Geological Survey

Acknowledgments

Personnel of the soils laboratory of Abbot A. Hanks, Inc., ran tests and provided data on plasticity index and maximum density of samples. Logs of borings and much general information were supplied by
Woodward, Clyde, Sherard, and Associates; many of their clients, too numerous to mention, gave permission .to. use data obtained in investigations on their property. Triaxial tests were run by T. C. Nichols and R. A. Speirer, of the U.S. Geological Survey. Many individuals in the Contra Costa County Department of Public Works provided data on landslides in the county. Donald L. Rheem, Utah Construction Company, and the East Bay Municipal Utilities District gave permission for entrance on their lands in the area of study, and many local residents gave information and permission to examine landslides on their property. The courtesy and assistance of all these firms, agencies, and individuals are gratefully acknowledged.

Method of collecting and compiling data

Landslides were examined within the area shown on plate 1. No. augering or other subsurface exploration was undertaken. An attempt was made to include all types of landslides and landslides formed in various settings, such as slides on both natural and artificial slopes; in both built-up and undisturbed areas; in both natural material and fill; in bedrock and surface soil;- on steep' and gentle slopes; with various exposures and a variety of vegetative cover. Slide-free slopes were also studied to obtain an indication of geologic conditions in nonslide areas.

Landslides listed in table '1 C in back ) and most of those shown on

plate 1 were examined in the field during May and June of 1961, or

January through April 1962; a few were examined in October 1962 to

January 1963. Some of these may since have been enlarged, by further

movement or removed or otherwise modified by construction activities.

Many landslides recorded by the Contra Costa County Department of Public

Works were visited* However, many of those which ' took place during the

heavy rains of 1958 had been repaired when the present s^i^yj;was made,

and the evidence for sliding obliterated; such lands Ii<le'i5

'included in this report.

' ' ^'

$ 1 All available data were tabulated on a form (see appendixj for each

^landslide as it was studied in the field r and the slide location was 0

plotted on 1: 12,000-scale aerial photographs. These data were 'entered

'.,-

,

«

. -.--.

. . . ; >.,-. > &' ' -'" V''C,~! - ;'. -«>, ' :,' -i^A-AtJ.-iAv'-r.C-i^jSa..- V- V'.-'-dsw- .--'"

on table 1.

' ..

<! ±, .t^r^''$.^tf?^i&:^?>^*&$&

The length and width of the landslides were estimated in the field where possible, generally by pacing, but some were estimated from the aerial photographs. Where possible, the length was measured from crown to foot of landslide (fig. 2) excluding any debris that may have flowed over the foot, as this length was thought to be a truer dimension of the landslide than the debris length. If debris length was measured, it is designated in the table by a "d" following the length figure. No attempt was made to determine specific areas that might become unstable in. the future .

Presentation of data

The location of 229 landslides in the area studied were plotted on a l:24,000-scale topographic map consisting of parts of the Richmond, Oakland East, Las Trampas Ridge, Briones Valley, and Walnut Creek 7%-minute quadrangles. Landslides examined in the .field are shown by solid dots and are numbered on the map and in the table; landslides seen only from a distance or on aerial photographs are shown on the map by unnumbered circles, and are not listed in the table. Multiple slides (see p. 13 for definition) are shown by one dot (or circle). For reference purposes a grid was drawn on the map; individual landslides within a given grid square are numbered consecutively'.

Every landslide shown on the accompanying map was well defined and easily observable at the time of the study; however, not every landslide in the area is. shown on the map. Therefore, although a landslide exists (unless it has since been removed by construction activity) at every point where one ±& shown on the map, it does not follow that there are no landslides elsewhere on the map.

Each landslide numbered on the map is shown by its identifying grid number in table 1. Blanks in the table indicate incomplete data.

v Form of landslide refers to the physical shape and complexity of the <

.landslide (single, multiple, or coalescent, p. 13). (See figure 4.) V i^ |

fA multiple landslide* is assigned a single number and the individual parts :

^making up the larger multiple landslide use the same number and a letter.^;

,- The relative ages of the* parts were determined if possible, and the oldest

one designated "a", the next younger one "b" and so on, but the letters

." ;'

.

J

-

..,,' - ,

.. '

. - : ;. - . .- - 'VfjJf v---, -.- -.. -i, - - , ; V , /--.-. v £- *. £\

fshould not be regarded as absolute indicators of the ages of ^individual ff ^

|parts making up a multiple landslide. Type of landslide on table 1 refers

|to the type of landslide described on plate 1 of an article !>y Varnes , ^ |

I (1958) in Highway Research Board Special Report 29. , .i^-:''. UiftSs^V:^-. .-^^^irf

"-A " - '-..^WM

-

' <-" "-v " - >' ' "-.''' " -'' ' ' - '* ' ' '' -" " !- -'*:^-. 1"'*-'' - " 1^''.""--"C"";v-"''V. 1' . " '' '

°f material refers to the material in the landslide, which was

|generally determined by examination of the scarpj Where only soil could

be seen in the scarp, the sliding material was listed as soil. However,

large slides probably involved bedrock, although subsequent slumping

the scarp may have obscured the rock.

^:;-:^S^'>k,.^'T :;-': f:-i-^:: ':^: :-^,.,'- ;: .,-

Surface of rupture

AE length

AC slope length

A"E T debris length (measured from top to tip)

EC height

E f C ! height if debris length is used

Width is measured at widest part, normal to length,

as seen in plan view

\

Figure 2. Idealized longitudinal cross section showing

parts of a landslide.

;

This illustration is preliminary and ha* not been edited or reviewed for conformity
with U.S. Geological Survey standards

Geologic setting indicates the relationship of the slide to orientation of the bedding and jointing. Attitudes of bedding sad jointing recorded at the slide are given in table 1; where no was recorded at the slide, orientation of beds was assumed to ae tiat of the nearest: recorded attitude. For a definition of the terms this column see page 18 and figure 5. Geologic setting was not for landslides in fill. Exposure refers to the approximate direction the slope is facing.
The vegetation recorded gives only a general idea of the ty?« OI vegetation in the immediate vicinity of the landslide. The ters "grass includes many herbaceous plants such as thistles, yarrow, tarveeci, aster, and dock. "Brush" consists primarily of coyote brush and poison oak; trees are mainly live oak, laurel, and buckeye.
The "damage" column is left blank if the landslide was in an field and caused no damage to man-made structures.

GEOGRAPHY

Topography

Long steep -sided northwest-trending ridges and valleys are the aost

prominent features of the topography of the area underlain by the Orinda

Formation. Perennial and intermittment streams flow generally parallel

to the ridges but in places have cut ravines across the ridges to fora a

trellis drainage pattern typical of folded rocks. The hillsides are

furrowed by numerous gullies, and are characteristically pock-narked with

the scars of landslides. The heads of the gullies cooaaonly are drqae-

like basins, which are formed by continuous creep and sliding of the soil

and rock. Many of the hillsides have a "ribbed" appearance, w&ere ^ .*

prominent beds of resistant sandstone alternating with shale extend in

parallel bands across the hillside.

-.-:. ''-^-^^' \^^'-' -^JL

The highest point in the map area underlain .by the Orinda

is a peak southeast of Saint Mary's College (pi. 1), with aiTelevatioa

of 1,296 feet. Local relief is greatest west of San Pablo Beservoir>

where the highest point on San Pablo Ridge is about 900 feet above

reservoir.

, .. ..,--.';. V. :>' ,1 3VC^V<1 . ^

Climate and vegetation

-^^.

~~ The climate, although relatively mild, is characterized by high temperatures and little or no rainfall during the summer months, an£ by moderately cool temperatures and rainfall during the winter montiis. *e annual precipitation at Saint Mary f s College, for a period of record 1943 through 1952, was 26.86 inches (U.S. Weather Bureau, 1931-52), with

84 percent falling from November through March, and a maximum annual total of 41.82 recorded in 1950. During the same period temperatures above 100° were recorded at Saint Mary's College during June through September, the highest beingj 107° in September; temperatures below freezing were recorded during October through May, the lowest being 19° in December and January.
Native vegetation consists primarily of live oak, buckeye, laurel, coyote brush, and poison oak in ravines and on many northerly facing slopes, and grasses, various herbaceous plants, sparse poison oak and coyote brush in most other areas. Plants characteristic of disturbed ground, such as thistles, are numerous on many landslides, cuts, and fills.
Culture
The Rancho Acalanes and Laguna de Los Palos Colorados land grants included much of the area shown on plate 1. Rancho Acalanes was granted to Candelario Valencia in 1834 (Bowen, 1951, p. 348); the town of Moraga preserves the name of Joaquin Moraga who in 1835 was co-grantee of the Laguna de Los Palos Colorados grant (Gudde, 1960, p. 200). Until recently the area was occupied primarily by small communities and ranches; since World War II it has been increasingly utilized for suburban housing, and is now populated by many people who work in San Francisco, Oakland, and other cities to the west. Large ranches have been sold to be used for suburban development. A freeway (California State Highway 24) now extends northeastward through the town of Orinda, and intensive development of transportation, commercial, and housing facilities is planned for most of the area.

GEOLOGY OF THE ORINDA FORMATION

Definition and boundaries

The Orinda Formation was described by Lawson (1914) as fresh-water

conglomerate, sandstone, clay shale, and limestone, with some thin seams

of lignite and .some thin layers of tuff, of Pliocene age. , It was shown

on the maps of the San Francisco folio (Lawson, 1914) as a broad band

extending from the upper part of Crow Creek northwestward to El Sobrante.

An arm of the formation extends into the Berkeley Hills, southwest of the

Moraga Formation, from near Valle Vista to Strawberry Creek above the

University of California. The formation is shown by Hall (1958) to extend

southeastward to the Livermore Valley.

'V,

In 1951 Savage, Ogle, and Creely, in a published abstract of a paper presented at a meeting of the Geological Society of America, Cordilleran Section, in Los Angeles, proposed that upper Tertiary nonmarine and volcanic rocks of west-central Contra Costa County be defined as a group which would include, in ascending order, the Orinda Formation of Miocene

to very early Pliocene age, the Moraga and Siesta Formations of early Pliocene age, the Bald Peak Formation of early to middle(?) Pliocene age, and a new unnamed formation of middle Pliocene age. The ages were based on vertebrate fossil evidence. They restricted the name Orinda to the rocks which lie in the Berkeley Hills proper; the unnamed formation included rocks similar in lithology but younger in age, which lie northeast of the Moraga Formation, and which were included in the unrestricted Orinda by Lawson. The proposed new terminology would eliminate having deposits both older and younger than the Moraga, Siesta, and Bald Peak Formations designated as the Orinda Formation. However, as was pointed out by Ham (1952, p. 15), differentiation of the Qrinda Formation and the Mulholland Formation (the new formation of .Savage, Ogle, and Creeley, 1951) is difficult in places where rocks of the Mulholland Formation .directly overlie those of the Orinda Formation. Ham (1952) described the Orinda and Mulholland rocks separately, but did not differentiate them on his map.
Part of the main band of the Orinda Formation as mapped by Lawson (1914) is shown on the accompanying map, excluding the arm of the formation that extends up into the Berkeley Hills proper, but including the unnamed formation proposed by Savage, Ogle, and Creely (1951). Recent mapping in the area indicates that some changes should be made in the boundaries and structure shown by Lawson, but because the work is incomplete, the boundaries were not revised for this report.
Lithology
The Orinda Formation consists of discontinuous, lenticular beds of fresh-water conglomerate, sandstone, and shale, with minor amounts of limestone, lignite, and tuff. Many of the beds are gradational normal to the bedding, and those which change rather sharply, such as shale to conglomerate, commonly have irregular bedding surfaces between them.
The proportions of conglomerate, sandstone, and shale vary from place to place. Some exposures several hundred feet long are almost entirely hard, firm sandstone and conglomerate, others are almost entirely shale, but commonly the formation consists of interbedded conglomerate, sandstone, and shale; the beds range in thickness from less than an inch to 80 feet. Most of the rocks, including the sandstone and conglomerate, contain some clay. Many thick beds of shale consist of fine crossbedded laminae, some less than a hundredth of an inch in thickness, which vary from slightly silty clay to slightly clayey fine sandstone.

The following small partial section containing rocks typical of the Orinda Formation was measured along a cut southeast of the Rheem Shopping Center, where the beds strike N. 62° W. and dip 50° SW. (Section measured to the nearest 0.5 foot.)

Conglomerate at top

Feet

Yellowish-gray wat.er-laid crystal tuff, partly altered to clay; contains numerous euhedral feldspar crystals ..... 9.0

Dark greenish-gray silty clay shale and clayey finegrained sandstone ..................... 22.5

Conglomerate with lenses of coarse, pebbly sandstone a few inches to 2 ft. thick; conglomerate contains pebbles of sandstone, limestone, quartz, chert, rhyolite, diabase, glaucophane schist and other metamorphic rocks; pebbles as much as 4 in. in diameter, average about 1 in., in a clayey sandstone matrix ................ 22.0

Medium greenish-gray soft clayey fine- to medium-grained sandstone .......................... 4.0

Light-gray hard dense limestone with sand grains and shell fragments ......................... 0.5
Medium greenish-gray sandy silty clay shale ......... 4.0
Conglomerate with sandstone lenses a few inches thick; similar to conglomerate described above .......... 67.0

Medium dark-gray, dark greenish-gray, and reddish-brown silty clay shale; breaks into fragments less than 1 in. in diameter ........................ 25.5

Light olive-gray clayey soft fine-grained sandstone, with some lenticular beds of medium- to fine-grained clayey sandstone, silty clay shale, and conglomerate a few inches thick .......................

12.0

Conglomerate with some sandstone lenses a few inches thick; similar to conglomerate described above; cut by small fault, strikes N. 35° to 44° E., dips about vertical; displacement on fault could not be determined; fault contains very wet clay gouge approximately 1 in. thick; at base, conglomerate fills shallow channels cut in underlying sandstone ...................

36.0

Light olive-gray.clayey soft fine- to medium-grained sandstone, with some lenticular beds and pockets of medium- to coarse-grained clayey sandstone, silty clay shale, and conglomerate a few inches thick; sandstone is jointed in three directions: N. 18° E., dips 24° SE.; N. 70° W., dips -23° NE.; and N. 18° E., dips 37° NW.; joints are spaced \ in. to 2 in. apart; sandstone breaks into fragments generally % in. to 1 in. in diameter; within a few inches of the surface the fragments spall and weather concentrically ..................

Feet 21.5

Conglomerate at base.

Total .............. 224.0

Results of a size analysis of sandy, silty shale from a cut between Saint Mary's College and Burton School is shown on the accompanying graph (fig. 3). An X-ray diffraction test of the shale showed that approximately 10 percent of the sample is montmorillonite clay.

Kachadoorian (1956) reports that microscopic analysis of a clay from the Orinda Formation near Orinda, stained by malachite green and safranine-Y, indicates that it contains 25 to 90' percent montmorillonite, and averages from 45 to 50 percent. Montmorillonite clay expands when saturated; free-swelling tests by Kachadoorian (1956) show that montmorillonite clays taken from the Orinda Formation near Orinda expand from 20 to 100 percent when saturated. Locally beds of clay shale show numerous minute slickensides which may be caused by swelling of the clay during wet seasons.

Although the rocks of the Orinda Formation are the bedrock of the area, they generally can be moved with standard earth-moving equipment without blasting. They may be considered soil or earth in the sense used by engineers and builders, but they are considered rock by geologists

The bedrock is commonly weathered to a depth of several inches to several feet. Weathered sandstone and conglomerate are soft and friable; the weathered shale generally consists of sandy silty clay with no visible bedding or joint structure. The plasticity index for a sample of weathered clay shale from a cut between Saint Mary's College and Burton School was.measured to be 22.

The soil developed on the bedrock generally consists of darkcolored sandy, silty clay with organic material, most of which is classified by the Department of Agriculture as adobe clay (Carpenter and Cosby, '1939). In general it is sandier and lighter in color where it is derived from sandstone, and in places it contains pebbles from the conglomerate. The plasticity index for one sample of soil from a cut between Saint Mary's College and Burton School was measured to be 31. Thickness of

10

100
90
80 x
CD UJ
lo/>r
g50 o
o
CC UJ

20 10 0
1.0

O.I .01

sand

-4- silt

GOCRVAMIINIV SOIlZi. EC. IUNN M(VI1IL1_LL.IIM(VIEC.TI EC.RS

Figure 3. Size analysis graph of a sandy silty shule from the Orinda Formation. Grain-sizo divisions arc according to tho Am. Soc. Testing Materials, Mechanical analysis of soils, 0422-39, 1939.

.001 clay

.0001

'Hi i K i 11 ii s t ra l i on is t<rc I tin tiiiir\ Mini tins not lieeu edilt:<l or re viewed fur rnufntmt ty w i t Ii I'.S. (ieological Nurvrv .-. I atxlii rH *

the soil depends largely' on the type of underlying rocks and the topo-' graphy and drainage. Soil may be lacking on hard sandstone layers, which rise as bare ridges from the hillsides. In general, thicker soils form on shales 'than on coarse-grained rocks, and the thickest soils, 10 feet or more in thickness, are in ravines and sma.ll gullies, where they consist of both residual and transported material. There does not seem to be any appreciable difference in thickness between soils on north-facing slopes and those on south-facing slopes.
Structure and age
The area studied lies in the Coast Ranges of California, which have a conspicuous northwest-trending structure. The rocks of the Orinda Formation have been compressed into northwest-trending folds, some of which are shown on the accompanying map (pi. 1). Detailed geologic mapping in this area has not yet been completed, and therefore only incomplete structural data can be shown on the map.
The northwest-trending folds are cut by numerous faults with differing orientations. In addition to those shown on the map, several bedding faults and numerous small cross faults, with displacements of a few inches to a few feec, were observed in fresh cuts; several faults that cut diagonally across the dipping beds were exposed during excavation for the Briones Dam, which will be on Bear Creek northwest of Sleepy Hollow School (pi. 1).
Faults in the Orinda Formation cannot be mapped easily except in fresh cuts. Unless the rocks are freshly exposed, it is not generally possible to tell whether a difference in lithology and attitude of beds from one: place to another is due to the lenticular nature of the beds or to minor faulting.
.Most of the rocks .are jointed, the joints ranging from fractures a quarter of an inch wide spaced a foot or more apart, to hairline cracks a fraction of an inch apart. Many joint surfaces are stained with yellowishbrown iron oxide. The relationships of jointing to bedding are discussed in detail on pages 18-20.
A few fresh-water mo Husks which were found in the course of the present study were not diagnostic, so that no new information on the geologic age of the formation was obtained. The age is generally accepted as Miocene and Pliocene, on the basis of work by Lawson (1914) and Savage, Ogle, and Creely (1951).
J'2

LANDSLIDES
Description
Landslides described in this report ar.e classified in part by a system proposed by Varnes (1958). He classified landslides according to type of movement--falls, slides (slump and block glide, etc.), flows, or complex and type of material. Landslides are further classified in this report as single, multiple, or coalescent, according to their physical shape and complexity. (See fig. 4.) Single landslides are isolated and well defined, generally with one pronounced scarp. Multiple landslides consist of two or more well-defined landslides in the same slide area, generally overlapping, which have formed at different times. Coalescent landslides consist of many overlapping and merging landslides; both the scarps and the debris have coalesced. Most coalescent landslides are amoeboid in shape, and the individual landslides making up the larger one are poorly defined. Generally only one or two distinct scarps can be seen within the entire coalescent landslide.
Most landslides in the Orinda Formation closely resemble the one illustrated in plate 1-h of Varnes (1958) which is a slump in the upper part and an earthflow in the lower part, in soil. Many slump and earthflow landslides in the Orinda Formation involve bedrock, which in general is loosely consolidated and in physical characteristics resembles a soil, in the sense used by engineers, rather than a hard, dense rock such as granite. Although slumping is definitely involved in the movement, slump blocks may not be well defined, and the extent and nature of the internal slip surfaces cannot be determined easily. Many other landslides are slow earthflows, illustrated in plate 1-p of Varnes (1958); some of these also involve loosely consolidated bedrock. Some landslides involving only soil are rapid earthflows or mudflows. Only two rockfalls were examined.
Coalescent slides are typical of the Orinda Formation. Although they may be on relatively smooth hillsides, coalescent landslides are characteristic of the many basin-shaped ravines. In such ravines, many landslides, generally involving largely soil but in some places bedrock as well, have formed at the head and -along the sides of the ravine, and both the scarps and the debris have coalesced. The ravines are enlarged by continuous creeping and sliding of their sides, so that the larger ravines eventually have a rounded, cirque-like basin at the top, and a rather wide, hummocky floor of slide debris which continues to creep slowly downs lope. The term "coalescent" is also used to describe a group of merging slides in cuts or fills.
13

A. Single
B. Multiple
C. Coalescent
Figure 4. Generalized sketches showing classification of landslides according to physical shape and complexity. A, single landslide; B, multiple landslide (slide a older than slide b)," C, coalescent landslide.
This illustration is preliminary and has not been edited or reviewed for conformity with U.S. Geological Survey standards
14

Some landslides in the Orinda Formation develop in one short period of time, come to rest, and do not move again, but historical records and personal observation show that many of them move in small increments over many years. Large movements of a slide may take place during an unusually wet winter season, or if the equilibrium of a slope is disturbed relatively rapidly by erosion (such as a stream cutting the toe) or by man.
Many soil slides move on the upper, weathered surface of clayey bedrock. Most of the landslides involving bedrock have a surface of rupture in shale. Less commonly, the slippage surface is in soft slightly clayey sandstone or conglomerate. Many landslides start in clay shale, and move out over sandstone and conglomerate layers;, if a landslide continues to enlarge from year to year, sandstone and conglomerate both above and below the original landslide may move.
The depth of most of the landslides examined could not be estimated from surface observations. The few whose rupture surfaces were completely exposed were 10 feet or less in depth. Most of the landslides show evidence of both slump and earthflow movement, and the methods described by Philbrick and Cleaves (1958) for estimating the depth of slump slides cannot be accurately applied to them. Their depth can be established only by subsurface or geophysical exploration. Engineering firms who have investigated landslides in the Orinda Formation report that those investigated range from 10 feet to more than 100 feet in depth (Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineers, Inc., 1960).
Causes of landsliding
The cause of a landslide is generally an increase in weight and (or) a decrease in shearing strength (Krynine and Judd, 1957, p. 641). The causes of landslides can also be described as external, which produce an increase of shearing stresses at unaltered shearing resistance of the material adjoining the slope, and internal, which reduce the shearing resistance of the slope material at unaltered shearing stresses (Terzaghi, 1950). Events or conditions that promote the cause of a landslide are defined by Krynine and Judd as contributing factors. Water is a major contributing factor for most landslides, because* it both increases weight and decreases shearing resistance. Climate, topography, geology, vegetation, and activities of =an and animals are also contributing factors. Most of these factors are interrelated, and it is difficult to evaluate their individual contributions to landsliding. In general a particular combination of factors rather than one specific factor contributes to landsliding.
Climate and geology are probably the basic contributing factors. The climate determines the amount and distribution of precipitation, which is generally the ultimate source of both surface and ground water, and the geology and climate together influence topography, vegetation,
15

and the density of human and animal population. The topography in turn may determine the microclimates of small areas. The composition and structure of the rocks are major factors contributing to landsliding. For example, soft, well-bedded alternating sands and clays that have been fractured and sheared by faulting will easily absorb water, causing reduced shearing resistance, and often slippage along fractures and bedding planes.
Rainfall is the primary source of water contributing to landsliding in the San Francisco Bay region. Landslides are especially numerous during and after winter rains, particularly in years of above-average rainfall. For example, an unusually large number of landslides formed in the spring of 1958, during a season in which the total precipitation recorded at Saint Mary's College was 46.78 inches (U.S. Weather Bureau, 1958). Weather records show that there are striking climatic differences in various parts of the San Francisco Bay region. For example, in the rainfall season of 1957-1958, precipitation at Lafayette was 41.22 inches; Oakland 31.37; Palo Alto 24.41; San Francisco 39.51; San Rafael 62.43; and Walnut Creek 30.20. However, amount of landsliding cannot be directly correlated to amount of rainfall alone; although rainfall was greater at San Rafael than any other place listed above, the amount of sliding in an area of comparable size there was less than in the area studied. Within the area of the Orinda Formation, however, it appears that less sliding has _taken place near Lafayette than near Saint Mary's College, where annual rainfall is consistently higher than at Lafayette. It is not possible to tell from the available data whether the difference in amount of sliding is due to small differences in climate, small differences in the lithology of the formation, or a combination of these and other factors.
The annual distribution of rainfall influences the type of slide that forms in the Orinda Formation. Most of the slides that formed in February of 1962, when 11.32 inches of rainfall was recorded at Saint Mary's College during 15 days from February 6 through 20, were of the slump-earthflow type. The rain fell on ground already damp from previous winter rains. The sliding material, consisting of soil, or soil and bedrock, generally moved as a single mass, with some slumping at the top of the slide, and earthflow at the toe. In October 1962, 13.82 inches of rainfall was recorded at Saint Mary's College during 4 days from October 10 through 14, with 8.40 inches recorded during the 24 hours ending at 5:00 p.m. on October 13 (State Climatologist, U.S. Weather Bureau, oral Communication January 2, 1963). The rain was the first of the winter rainy season, and fell on ground that had dried during the summer. Most of the landslides that formed during the above 4 days of rain were mudflows, consisting of saturated soil that moved on the underlying bedrock surface. The soil did not move as a single mass, but flowed out of small pockets in a semi-liquid state, leaving a train of debris extending down the hillside for as much as several hundred feet. The debris consisted of thin mud containing pieces of turf and subangular
16

to rounded pieces of soil. These landslides are the type described by Kesseli (1943) as "disintegrating soil slips." Landslide no. 17-23 (table 1) is typical of such a mudflqw.
Geologic factors that make it easy for rainwater to enter the ground contribute to landaliding. One of these factors is the montmorillonite clay in the rocks of the Orinda Formation and its overlying soil. During wet seasons the clay absorbs much water, which increases the weight of the rock and soil and decreases its shearing resistance. During dry seasons the clay loses water and shrinks, causing the formation of cracks several inches wide and several feet deep, which provide easy access for rainwater during the next wet season. Other geologic factors affecting the penetration of water into the ground are the stratigraphy of the Orinda Formation, which consists primarily of alternating layers of sandstone or conglomerate and shale; the deformation of the strata into folds, so that they commonly dip steeply; and the numerous joints, faults, and other fractures cutting the rocks.
Rainwater can find easy access to the formation through exposures of the tilted sandstone and conglomerate beds, many of which are relatively soft and porous. The joints allow some passage of water into the shale, as well as into the sandstone and conglomerate. The water can move downward and laterally through the sandstone and conglomerate beds and along the interfaces between the sandstone or conglomerate and the shale, and some is absorbed by the shale. Pore water pressures may build up in sandstone layers which are confined by less pervious shale beds. These pressures contribute to landsliding (Krynine and Judd, 1957, p. 648). Water within the formation decreases its shearing resistance, especially along the joint planes, and to a lesser extent along the bedding planes, which in many places are poorly defined.
Most faults that cut the Orinda Formation contain impervious clay gouge ranging from a fraction of an inch to as much as 18 inches in thickness; in many places the gouge acts as a barrier to ground water. Water moving in sandstone beds dams up against the fault, so that pore water pressure in the sandstone is increased. The increase in pore pressure makes rocks more susceptible to sliding. Faults do not appear to be a major geologic factor contributing to landsliding in the Orinda Formation, although slickensided or clay-coated fault surfaces may infrequently be slide surfaces, as in slide no. G4-2 (table 1).
A geologic factor which is indirectly related to landsliding is the effect of the geology on the topography. It is obvious that landsliding will not take place on a perfectly flat surface. If rocks are uplifted, erosion begins immediately. Where stream erosion takes place rapidly, valley .sides will be generally steep. The rocks of the Orinda Formation have been uplifted'during geologically recent times, and they are still being actively eroded. Therefore the hill slopes are relatively steep, and if the weight of the rocks and (or) soil underlying these slopes is
17

increased, and (or) their shearing resistance decreased, they will tend to move down the slopes into more stable positions. As rapid erosion continues, the equilibrium of the slopes will be constantly disturbed, and landsliding and other forms of mass movement will continue until all slopes are reduced to a very gentle gradient.
Another geologic factor which influences- landsliding is the relationship of the bedding and jointing to the land surface.
The tilted beds of the Orinda Formation strike generally northwest, and most major ridges and valleys are roughly parallel to the strike. Synclinal troughs roughly coincide with the crests of some of the ridges; on each flank of these ridges the beds dip in a direction opposite to the ground slope. On strike ridges with no synclinal troughs at their crests, the beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope on one side, and in the same direction (but not necessarily at the same angle) as the hill slope on the other side of the ridge.
In some places ridges and valleys cross the strike of the dipping beds. In most of these places hillsides cut across the strike of the beds at nearly right angles. Relatively few hillsides cut diagonally across the strike of the beds.
The above general relationships between the attitude of the beds of the Orinda Formation and the slope of the hills can be described in terms of the following six general categories: (1) beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope of the hill; (2) beds dip in the general direction of hill slope but more steeply; (3) beds dip in the general direction of hill slope but less steeply; (4) strike of dipping beds is approximately normal to direction of hill slope; (5) strike of dipping beds intersects hill slope at approximately 45°, beds dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope; and (6) strike of dipping beds intersects hill slope at approximately 45°, beds dip in the general direction of hill slope. In classifications (1) to (3), the strike of the beds is approximately parallel to the slope contours. Some of these relationships are illustrated on figure 5. The above six categories are used in the tables .and in the following text to describe the relationship of the bedding to the land surface.
No general categories similar to those listed above can be used to describe the relationship of the jointing to the bedding or the land surface. The general trend of the beds can be traced for hundreds of feet both in the field and on aerial photographs, even though the beds are lenticular, bedding planes are poorly defined in many places, and the beds are offset by minor faults. In most places the attitude of bedding recorded nearest any given slide can be assumed to represent t-he approximate attitude of bedding at the slide. In contrast, the general trend of a particular joint set cannot be traced as can the bedding. A joint surface recorded at an individual exposure may not
18

sw NE
Figure 5- Sketch showing certain, idealized relationships of bedding and jointing to land surface. Face of cut perpendicular to northwest trending ridge looking northwest. In this sketch the cut trends at right angles to the strike of the beds (strike of beds is the direction of a line formed by the intersection of a bedding plane with a horizontal plane). Beds of s'andstone (stippled) and shale dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope on the northeast side of the ridge, and in the general direction of the hill slope but more steeply on the southwest side of the ridge. Joints (dashes) dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope on the southwest side of the ridge, and in the general direction of the hill slope but more steeply on the northeast side of the ridge. Landslide in shale moved parallel to the strike of the beds. Slide moved out of face of cut toward observer.
This illustration is preliminary and has not been edited or reviewed for conformity with U.S. Geological Survey standards
19

represent the most prominent joint set in the area, and it may not extend for any great distance. Only joint measurements taken at the slide itself are applicable to any individual slide. For this reason no generalizations are made in the text or the table regarding the attitude of joints with respect to the bedding and hill or cut slope; specific attitudes are given in the table where measurements were taken at a particular slide.
Most attitudes of joints were recorded at cut slopes, as joints could in general be more clearly observed in cuts. Only eight sets of data including attitudes of beds, joints, and slopes were obtained for landslides on natural slopes. Seven of these sets included a joint plane having a strike subparallel to the slope contours, and dipping in the same general direction as the slope, but more steeply.
In order to determine whether certain joint sets were more prominent than others in the Orinda Formation, and their relationship to the bedding, 36 sets of data consisting of attitudes of associated joint planes and bedding planes were plotted on a stereographic net (Higgs and Tunell, 1959). Figure 6 is a simplified stereographic diagram showing the poles of the joint and bedding planes. In addition the angles between strike of beds and joints were tabulated, and the downward-opening dihedral angles between joint and bedding planes were determined by use of a stereographic net. These studies show that out of 76 joint planes measured, 30 have strikes intersecting the strike of the bedding at 0° to 30°; 22 intersect the strike of the beds at 31° to 60°; and 24 intersect at 61° to 90°. The downward-opening dihedral angle between joint and bedding planes lies between 80° and 100° for 37 out of 76 angles determined; the largest recorded angle was 125°, and the smallest 28°; 67 are between 50° and 105°.
These data indicate that joints strike in almost any flirection in relation to the bedding, with a slight preference for a strike subparallel to the beds, and approximately half form downward-opening dihedral angles with the bedding of between 80° and 100°. These general relationships are also indicated in the stereographic diagram.
Exposure must also be considered in evaluating the effect of the relationship of bedding and jointing to the land surface. Slopes with a general northerly exposure do not dry out as rapidly as those with a southerly exposure, regardless of the orientation of the strata underlying the slope. Rocks and soil on northerly facing slopes therefore quickly become saturated during the rainy season, commonly with resultant landsliding. Because beds dip into the hill slope on many of the northeastfacing slopes in the area studied (pi. 1), it is difficult to determine whether the slope exposure or the geologic setting is the predominant factor influencing sliding in bedrock.
20

00(2)

r ±r^ +"1/ + +

* §o o x

\

X,

1

Figure 6. Simplified stereographic diagram showing poles of joint plants and bedding planes. Open circles indicate poles of bods dipping to thr southwest; large crosses indicate poles of joint planes measured whrr«beds dip to the southwest. Dots indicate poles of bedding planes dipping in other directions, and small x's indicate poles of associated joint pi anes.
'Hi i s i 1 I us t r .11 i mi is ^i re I i mi not h«*i»u r><lit.<'<l or revii-wi-il f wit!* I . S. lico I f>^ i c :i I Siirv
21

Geologic setting and exposure of landslides studied for the present report are shown in table 2. Forty-one slides involving bedrock were examined on natural slopes; 31 were on north-, northwest-, or northeastfacing slopes; 26 were on slopes where beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope; 21 were on northeast-facing slopes where beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope.
If exposure is the predominant factor causing landslides in bedrock on natural slopes, as many landslides involving bedrock should form on northeast-facing hillsides where beds are inclined in the same direction as the hill slope, as form on northeast-facing hillsides where the beds are inclined in a direction opposite to the hill slope. If attitude of beds is the predominant factor causing landslides in bedrock, as many slides involving bedrock should form on southwest-facing hillsides where beds dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope as form on northeastfacing hillsides where beds dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope..
Although the area studied has approximately as many southwest-facing as northeast-facing hillsides where beds dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope, only 5 landslides examined involving bedrock were on the southwest-facing slopes, whereas 21 were on the northeast-facing slopes. Beds are inclined in the same direction as the hill slope on very few northeast-facing hillsides, and only two slides examined involving bedrock were in such a geologic setting. Although beds dip in the same direction as the hill slope on the southwest-facing sides of several long ridges in the area studied, relatively few landslides were seen in such a setting, and none examined involving bedrock were in such a geologic setting. Several large landslides which may involve bedrock were seen in the large ravine northeast of slides 17-9 to 17-13 (pi. 1), where the beds dip in the same general direction as the southwest-facing hill slope. These slides, shown as unnumbered circles on the map, were seen from a distance and (or) on aerial photographs and were not examined in detail. However, in some similar places for example, the southwest-facing slopes northwest of Saint Mary's College landsliding is conspicuously absent.
The observations -indicate that probably a combination of geologic setting and exposure facilitates landsliding rather than either one being predominant. Landslides involving bedrock on natural slopes tend to be least abundant on southwest-facing slopes where the beds are inclined in the same general direction as the hill slope, and most abundant on the northeast-facing slopes where beds are inclined in a direction opposite to the hill slope.
"As mentioned on page 18, hill slopes approximately normal to the strike of the bedding, or at 45° to it, are not common in the area studied. However, where hill slopes do cut across the strike for example, in the places south of Saint Mary's College marked "many landslides" on plate l--landslides approximately parallel to the strike of the beds are abundant. Five slides examined involving bedrock on natural slopes were
22

TaMe *, ~l)i $ t r ibut ion u) / ,9") landslides according f o geo/ngi'c

a/i</ expo mire

Material and l>pe of slope

Geo logic setting Dip opposite to slope

Bedrock (may include

some soi 1 and 'or fill)

Natural

Cut 1

2() i)

So i 1 . on ly

Natural

1

Cut 1

31 0

Fill (IIUIN i nr I n idSOUK' .><) i I In),! no
bed rock i "
...

Dip in general direr L i on of si ope IHI t more sleep! )
Pip in g tine nil direction of slope tui t less a t e e p 1 ^

0
+

32 ...

13 3 ... .-..

--...

Strike approximately normal to slope

5

9

15 ...

...

Strike approximately 45 ° to slope, dip oppos i t e to slope

3

4

1 ...

...

Strike approximately

to

45° to slope, dip i n gene ra 1 d I r ec-

t i on of slope

2

8

4 ...

...

Geologic setting uncertain

3

6

11 » . .

To t a 1 s

U 38

78 12

Kxposure

... ...

Nor I lie a.si Nort liues t North Fast West Sou th Sou theast Son I liwes t
Tot a 1 s

27 9 40 5

3 3 11 ...

12

3 ...

... 7 . ... ...

33

6 mn

15

1«

o4

61

I 5 Hn

41 38

78 12

18 1 1
2 1 ...
'1 2
2ii

,,Aiiy p«n of ihc slope cut "Gfulogic setting nut dctormiucd fur landslides in fill
in (I u (ics out- slide »liiv rt- beds dip at a|ip rox i nia C e 1 y same anKl<-' u s> slope

where the strike of dipping beds is approximately normal to the hill slope; three were on northwest-facing slopes, one on a south-facing slope, and one on the southeast-facing slope. Three were where strike of dipping beds intersects i-ie hill slope at approximately 45°, and beds dip in a direction opposite co the slope; all three were on west-facing slopes. Two were where the strike of dipping beds intersects the hill slope at approximately 45°, and beds dip in the same general direction as the slope; one was on a northeast- and one on a north-facing slope. Geologic setting was uncertain for three landslides involving bedrock, which were on northeast-facing slopes.
Inasmuch as landsliding is more prevalent on slopes where beds dip in a direction opposite to a hill slope, movement on bedding planes is apparently not a major factor in sliding on natural slopes in the Orinda Formation. One reason for the infrequency of bedding-plane slides may be that the dip of the beds in most places in the Orinda Formation is 30° or more, and natural slopes are most commonly 20° to 30°; the beds are therefore generally supported laterally, even in places where they dip in approximately the sane direction as the hill slope.
Sliding on joint planes has been observed on natural slopes, however, even where the joint surfaces dip more steeply than the hill slope and are supported down dip. Slides H6-11 and H7-1 (table 1) are examples of such slides. Slippage seems more probable along joint surfaces than along bedding planes, perhaps because joints are cracks, whereas many contacts between beds are not. Inaszrach as joints show a slight preference for a strike subparallel to the strike of the bedding, with a dip generally opposite to the dip of the beds, some joints striking subparallel to the hill slope, and dipping in the same general direction as the slope but more steeply, can be expectad where beds dip in a direction opposite to a hill slope. Such joints ray be a major iractor contributing to landsliding in bedrock on natural slopes.
A possible factor contributing to the scarcity of bedrock landslides where beds are inclined in the same direction as the hill slope is the relationship of the drainage to the tilted beds of the Orinda Formation. When the rocks weiTe uplifted, downcutting began first in the softer shales and siltstones of the formation (fig. 7A) so that in many places valleys formed roughly parallel to the strike of the beds. Downcutting proceeded until a more resistant sandstone or conglomerate layer was reached, when erosion continued down the dip of the sandstone. The side of a ravine where beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope then consists largely of shale, whereas the side cf the ravine where beds dip in the same direction as the slope consists largely of the more resistant rocks (fig. 7B). As the ravine enlarges, resistant beds are cut through, and shale beds are exposed on the side of the ravine where the beds dip in the same direction as the slope of the hill (fig. 7C). During this part of the erosion cycle, some landslides may form in the exposed shale beds. As the ravine becomes wider, alternating sandstone and shale beds are
24

A
B
Figure 7. Sketches illustrating four stages in the development of valleys in alternating sandstone (stippled) and shale of the Orinda Formation. A, gully in shale; B, ravine after erosion down the dip of a resistant. sands to.ne layer; C, valley exposing sandstone and shale on both sides; I), larger valley exposing sandstone and shale on both sides-- sands tone !>r-(!s dipping in the same direction as the slope on one side of the valley form ridg« % s wliirii art. as buttresses to support the shale behind them.
Tli i .H i I 1 not l.'-'-n
25 will, I .

exposed on either side of it. Where the beds dip in the same direction as the slope of the hill, resistant sandstone beds dipping in the same direction as the slope, but more steeply, form ridges which act as buttresses, supporting the shale behind them. However, if the sandstone is soft and clayey, it does not form a buttress but may itself slide. On the side of the valley where the beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope of the hill, the buttressing effect of resistant sandstone is not so pronounced, particularly where shale layers are relatively thick and sandstone layers are thin (fig. 7D). As downcutting by streams continues, the beds on the side of the valley where the beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope are continuously undercut, so that slides continue to form, particularly where the shale layers are thick. If alternating layers of shale and resistant sandstone are thin, slides are less frequent Slides form throughout this cycle in the sides of tributary ravines, where sliding takes place primarily in shale, approximately parallel to the strike of the beds.
Valleys in each of these stages of development can be seen within the area studied. The first stage of downcutting can be seen at slide 18-10, where a small gully parallel to the strike of the beds is forming in shale. Ravines which have cut roughly down the dip of resistant beds on one side, exposing shale on the other side, are clearly illustrated at the heads of the ravines containing slides 17-5 and J7-6 (pi. 1). The third stage of development is represented by the valley northeast of slide 17-9 (pi. 1) . The fourth stage is shown by exposures along Rheem Boulevard, both east and west of Moraga Road, where massive sandstone and conglomerate beds dipping the same general direction as the slope of the hill are exposed in places as bare ridges along the hillside; alternating sandstone or conglomerate and shale beds dip opposite to the slope of the hill on the south side of the road, east of Rheem.
Exposure is a major factor contributing to soil slides. Seventyeight soil slides on natural slopes were examined. Fifty-four (or 69 percent) were on north, northwest-, or northeast-facing slopes; however, only 34 were on slopes underlain by beds that dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope. A study of slope exposure of landslides in soil by Beaty (1956), in an area overlapping that covered by the present study, showed that 70 percent of the 112 landslides he examined were on north-, northwest-, east-, or northeast-facing slopes. Factors other than . exposure were not evaluated in Beaty f s study.
Vegetation on the slopes may contribute to landsliding because it slows runoff,, allowing more penetration of water. Deep-rooted plants, such as trees and brush, aid in holding the slopes but grass, particularly annual grass with shallow roots, allows penetration of the water without providing much protection against landsliding. The role of vegetation in inhibiting landslides is dramatically shown on the northeast side of the long northwest-trending ridge north of Rheem. Numerous landslides are visible on the southeast end of the ridge, which is covered with grass; only one slide was observed on the northwest end of the ridge,
26

which is covered" with brush and trees. A long-time local resident provided the information that the trees and brush on the north end of the ridge have grown up within the last 50 years. None grew on the south end of the ridge because cattle grazed there constantly during the 50-year period. Ke reported that although some landslides existed on the south part of the hillside 50 years ago, they were not as extensive as they now are. Landslides that formerly existed in the area now covered with brush ' have apparently been halted and covered by the growing brush and trees, whereas sliding has continued in the grassy area. It is not known why the growth of brush and trees accelerated during the last 50 years.
The activities of man are a major factor contributing to landsliding. Landslides in both cut and fill slopes are due directly to the activities of man, in combination with geologic and climatic factors.
Landslides in cut slopes are due largely to steepening of the slope and removal of lateral support. These factors alone do not necessarily contribute to landsliding, but will do so under certain geologic conditions. The same conditions that facilitate landsliding on natural slopes by allowing penetration of water are also operative on cut slopes. (See p. 17.) The relationship of the bedding and jointing to the cut face also influences sliding in cut slopes.
Many of the landslides that move approximately parallel to the strike of the beds form initially in shale, which slides out leaving the more resistant sandstone or conglomerate layers as ribs. The shale appears to move on both bedding and joint planes. In some cuts sandstone and conglomerate are involved, or move later as the landslide enlarges.
Definite movement on joint planes was noted in two landslides (nos. H6-4 and H7-1, table 1) involving bedrock in cuts, where the beds dip in a direction opposite to the slope of the cut face. In both of these landslides the joints dip in the same direction as the cut face, but more -steeply. -Movement on joint planes was also observed in two landslides (nos. E5-1 and"H7-23, table 1) where the strike of dipping beds intersects the cut face at approximately 45°, and beds dip in a direction opposite to the cut face. Definite evidence of movement on both joint and bedding planes was observed at most of the landslides where the strike of the dipping beds t intersects the cut face at approximately 45°, and beds dip in the same general direction as the cut face. In many of these landslides the bedding planes and prominent joint planes intersect each other in such a manner that they form a V, with the trough of the V inclined toward the face of the cut. Landslides G4-2, H6-17, and'J7-2 (table 1) are examples of such slides.
Two landslides were examined where beds dip in the same direction as a cut face. At landslide no. G6-1, both natural and cut slopes were involved in sliding; beds dip at approximately the same angle as the natural slope, but there was no definite field evidence to indicate whether
27

any part of the sliding was on bedding planes. Slide no. G&-10, where the beds dip in the same direction as the cut but more steeply, did not move on bedding planes, but across them.
Only, one landslide (no. B2-6, on San Pable Dam Road) was examined where beds dip in the general direction of a cut face, but at a lesser inclination than that of the cut, so that the beds "daylighted" in the face of the cut. Here the strike of the dipping beds intersects the cut face at an angle of approximately 45°, and sliding apparently took place on both joint and bedding planes.
Curiously, no landslides were seen in the area of study where the beds dip in the same direction as a cut face, but more gently. One such cut was examined northwest of Glorietta School, northeast of landslide no. F6-8. Here the attitude of the cut was approximately M. 55° W., 30° SW., and the attitude of bedded sandstone and shale in the cut was approximately N. 50° W., 25° SW., so that the beds "daylighted" in the face of the cut. The beds broke in some places along two sets of joints with attitudes of N. 45° W., 85° SW., and N. 35° E., 35° NW., so that some small pieces 1 inch to 8 inches in diameter fell to the base of the cut, but no actual sliding was observed.
Slope exposure does not appear to be a major factor contributing to landsliding in cuts; 21 of the 38 landslides involving bedrock in cuts were on north-, ease-, northwest-, or northeast-facing slopes. Most cuts examined were only a few years old; exposure may be a factor in older, more weathered cuts.
Insufficient data are available to determine the most suitable height and angle of slope or benching procedures for cuts under various conditions of geology and exposure.
Many landslides in cut slopes involve very little, if any, of the bedrock. Some cuts are entirely in soil, soil and weathered bedrock, or old slide deposits. Any of these materials may be susceptible to sliding when saturated, particularly if they contain large amounts of clay. In many places where cuts have exposed bedrock overlain by several feet of clayey soil, the soil has slid on the weathered bedrock surface, moving down over the bedrock cut face and onto cleared areas below. In this type of slide, water percolates down through the cracks, wonnholes, and rootholes in the soil during the rainy season, and may flow along the weathered surface of the bedrock to the face of the cut. The water saturates the soil, increases its weight, and decreases the shearing strength of both the soil and the top clayey part of the weathered bedrock, which then develops a slide surface.
28

Other cuts develop landslides because they have been made across a small drainageway or depression in the hillside, thus removing lateral support for clayey soil or alluvial material in the drainageway. During a rainy season the clayey macerial in the drainageway becomes saturated and moves downhill into the cut.
Landslides in some cuts are due to cutting across old slides. If a slide has come to rest and stabilized itself, it may move very little or not at all for many years. However, if the support of the lower part of the slide is removed by cutting the toe, the slide will tend to move down into the cut into a more stable position.
Landslides in artificial fills are primarily due' to works of" man, and are only incidentally influenced by other factors, such as exposure or geology (type of material used as fill or foundation for fill). Exposure appears to be a factor contributing to landslides in fill. Twenty-six'landslides in fill were examined; 22 of these were on north-, east-, northeast-, or northwest-facing slopes.
Triaxial shear tests were performed on a, sample of material from the Orinda Formation. The resulting data given below are intended to be an example only, and should not be used in designing fill slopes. The properties of the rocks of the Orinda Formation vary considerably from place to place, and these data are applicable only to the specific rocks tested. Each fill requires its own tests and design, which should be determined by engineers, experienced in this type of design.
The sample was taken from a cut between Saint Mary's College and Burton School, and consisted of a number of approximately 1-pound grab samples taken at 2-foot intervals for about 200 feet along the cut face. The cut lies across the strike of the beds, so that the sample contained sandstone, shale, and conglomerate in amounts reasonably representative of these materials in the cut. Specimens of the sample were compacted to 90 percent of the maximum density as determined by State of California test method no. 216E (California Division of Highways, I960), and saturated, consolidated triaxial shear tests performed.
f
Test data indicated that the material sampled' has a friction angle of about 20° and a cohesion of about 600 pounds per square foot. Using a chart of stability numbers (Taylor, 1948, p. 459), and neglecting seepage forces, these data indicate that a compacted fill composed of this particular mixture of material should be stable in 2:1 slopes more than 50 feet in height. Even though this material may make good fill if properly compacted, it may not be stable in cuts because of inherent geologic properties of the undisturbed bedrock. For example, a slide which moved on both joint and bedding planes formed in the cut from which the sample for the triaxial test was taken. The bedding and jointing of the undisturbed bedrock are major factors contributing to landsliding in cuts, for they facilitate the penetration of water and building up of pore pressure in confined sandstone beds, and joint and bedding planes
29

in undisturbed bedrock may become slide planes. In a compacted fill the bedding and jointing are essentially destroyed. The fill is generally quite thoroughly.mixed, so that there are no layers of clayey material alternating with sandy material, and the overall composition of the fill is .then a reasonably dense, uniform mixture, containing sand, clay, silt, and pebbles. If, however, the fill is not sufficiently compacted, it may slide if saturated.
Gophers are a factor contributing to sliding, for their burrows form channels for water to penetrate the ground. Gopher holes were observed extending from the surface of the ground to the slide scarp in several landslides; water was issuing from the holes. Gophers burrow in shale, soft sandstone, soil, and fill; a well-compacted -fill is less likely to be riddled with gopher holes, however, as gophers prefer soft ground in which to dig.
It is not known how many slides in the area studied may have been caused by earthquakes. It is well known that earthquakes have triggered some landslides (Varnes, 1958, p. 43), and landslides in other parts of the seismically active San Francisco Bay area were precipitated by the earthquakes of 1906 (Lawson and others, 1908) and 1957 (Bonilla, 1959, p, 34). If a major shock should occur during wet weather, when the hillsides were saturated, undoubtedly many slides would be triggered in the area underlain by the Orinda Formation.
Selected hillsides examined are conspicuously free of sliding. Cuts on such hillsides showed mostly firm conglomerate and sandstone, or almost entirely clay shale. None of the cuts examined on slide-free hills exposed alternating thick sandstone or conglomerate and shale beds. A reason for lack of sliding may be the homogeneity of the rocks; there are no confined sandstone layers which can carry water into the formation, and in which pore water pressures can build up. Most hills underlain predominantly by shale are gently rolling, with slopes that generally do not exceed 18°. One might assume that sliding on these hills is infrequent because the shale has been eroded to relatively low hills with flat, stable slopes; however, this does not explain why some cuts steeper than 18° in shale showed* no indication of sliding.
Prevention of landsliding
A complete discussion of prevention and correction of landslides is beyond the scope of this report. Methods of prevention and (or) correction are described by Bonilla (1960), Baker and Marshall (1958), Baker and Yoder (1958), and Root (1958). Articles by these authors also contain additional references on the subject in their bibliographies.
In highway"construction, major slide areas are commonly treated by avoidance, removal of material from the slide, installation of subdrains, construction of restraining structures, hardening of the slide mass, or some combination of these methods (Root, 1958). In much highway
30

construction, it is more economical to consider relatively jainor sliding as a maintenance problem rather than to cut slopes excessively flat or resort to expensive preventive measures.
Although much relatively minor sliding is an acceptable maintenance problem to highway departments, it may be a source of a major damage and expense to a business establishment or home owner. Landslides in a housing area may undermine or damage patios, driveways, swimming pools, and foundations that are constructed on a slope or close to the top edge of a slope and push out retaining walls, slough down into parking lots and patios or against buildings, and damage lawns and gardens constructed at the base of a slope. Most home owners do not have the financial resources to correct even a small landslide that may require several thousand dollars to repair properly. In constructing dwellings, therefore, it is essential to prevent even small amounts of landsliding.
Damage to dwellings and other structures may possibly be avoided if a thorough geological and engineering investigation is made of proposed building sites to. determine slide and potential slide conditions, and other problems inherent in the natural setting. Suitable engineering design may then be possible to prevent or reduce damage. Sliding in some parts of the Orinda Formation probably cannot be prevented; in some parts it may be prevented only by extensive drains and special engineering design and construction. Land that would be highly expensive to develop for housing might be used for parks or other recreational facilities.
Water, both on the surface and underground, is a major factor contributing to landsliding. . Therefore, a common approach to preventing and correcting landslides is to prevent as much water as possible from entering the ground, and remove it as rapidly as possible if entrance cannot be prevented. Prevention and correction by drainage are discussed by Root (1958) and by Baker and Marshall (1958).
In addition to the methods suggested by the above authors, water from the roof drains of a building should be collected into one main drain and run to street gutters or storm sewers. Gophers should be exterminated in hillside developments, as their burrows provide a way for water to enter the ground.
The data assembled in this preliminary report indicate that landslides involving bedrock of the Orinda Formation on natural slopes tend to be most abundant on northeast-facing slopes where beds dip in a direction opposite to the hill slope. Exposure is a major factor contributing to soil slides on natural slopes; soil slides are most.abundant on north-, northwest-, or northeast-facing slopes. The possibility of both bedrock and soil slides should be considered in planning development of a northerly facing hillside.
31

Landslides involving bedrock in cut slopes commonly show evidence of movement on joint planes. Landslides in cuts approximately normal to the strike of the beds, or in cuts where the strike of dipping beds intersects the cut slope at approximately 45° may move on both joint and bedding planes. Some landslides in cuts where the beds dip in a direction opposite to the cut face also show evidence of movement on joint planes. Cuts in which the beds dip in the same direction as the cut but more gently may slide on bedding planes. Slope exposure does not appear to be a major factor contributing to landsliding of bedrock in cuts. When planning cuts in bedrock, special attention should be paid to the relationship of cuts to the bedding and jointing of the rock.
Exposure appears to be a major factor contributing to landslides in artificial fill. Fills with north, east, northwest, or northeast exposure should be designed and placed with particular care, as they will be especially prone to surficial sliding because of their exposure.
Additional precautions that might be observed to help prevent landsiiding are:
1. Do not cut off the toe of a known slide without first assuring stabilization of the remaining slide material.
2. Do not make cuts or place fills across even minor hillside drainage channels without providing drainage for water that may flow down them in the wet season.
3. Plant deep-rooted plants which do not require intensive watering, to aid in holding slopes against sliding. The effectiveness of planting is limited, however, and planting alone will not retain extensive or deepseated landslides.
4. Be cautious regarding irrigation in hillside areas.
32

REFERENCES CITED
Baker, R. F. , and Marshall, H. C., 1958, Control and correction, in Eckel, E. 3., ed., Landslides and engineering practice: Natl. Research Council, Highway Research Board Spec. Rept. 29, p. 150-188.
Baker, R. F., and Yoder, E. J., 1958, Stability analyses and design of connrol methods, in Eckel, E. 3., ed., Landslides and engineering practice: Natl. Research Council, Highway Research Board Spec. Rept. 29, p. 189-216.
Beaty, C. B., 1956, Landslides and slope exposure [California]: Jour. Geology, v. 64, p. 70-74.
Bonilla, M. G., 1959, Geologic observations in the epicentral area of the San Francisco earthquake of March 22, 1957: California Div. Mines Spec. Rept. 57, p. 25-37.
____I960, Landslides in the San Francisco South quadrangle, California: U.S. Geol. Survey open-file report, Feb. 9, 1960, 44 p.
Bowen, 0. E. Jr., 1951, Highways and byways of particular geologic interest: California Div. Mines Bull. 154, p. 315-379.
California Division of Highways, 1960, Materials Manual, Testing and Control procedures, V.I: Sacramento, Calif. Div. Highways.
Carpenter, E. J. , and Cosby, S. W., 1939, Soil Survey of Contra Costa County, California: U.S. Dept. Agriculture, Ser. 1933, no. 26, 83 p.
Gudde, E. G., 1960, California place names, 2d ed.: Berkeley and Los Angeles: California Univ. Press, 383 p.
Hall, C. A., Jr., 1958, Geology and paleontology of the Pleasanton area, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, California: California Univ., Dept. Geol. Sci. Bull., v. 34, no. 1, p. 1-90.
Ham, C. K., 1952, Geology of Las Trampas Ridge, Berkeley Hills, California: California Div. Mines Spec. Rept. 22, 26 p.
Higgs, D. V., and Tunell, George, 1959, Angular relations of lines and planes with applications to geologic problems: Dubuque, Iowa, Wen. C. Brown Co. Pubs., 43 p.
Jones, F. 0., Embody, D. R., and Peterson, W. L., 1961, Landslides along the Columbia River valley, northeastern Washington: U.S. Geol.
.. Survey Prof. Paper 367, 98 p. [1962]. Kachadoorian, Reuben, 1956, Engineering geology of the Warford Mesa sub-
division, Orinda^ California: U.S. Geol. Survey open-file report, Dec. 18, 1956, 14 p. Kesseli, J. E., 1943, Disintegrating soil slips of the Coast Ranges of central California: Jour. Geology, v. 51, p. 342-352. Krynine, D. P., and Judd, W. R., 1957, Principles of engineering geology and geotechnics: New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc. 730 p. Lawson," A. C., 1914, Description of the San Francisco district; Tamalpais, San Francisco, Concord, San Mateo, and Hayward quadrangles: U.S. -Geol. Survey Geol. Atlas, Folio 193, 24 p. Lawson, A. C., .and'others, 1908, The California earthquake of April 18, 1906; Report of the State Earthquake Investigation Commission: Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 87, v. 1; pt. 1, 254 p.; pt. 2, p. 255-451.
33

Phi.lbri.ck, S. S. , and Cleaves, A. 3., 1958, Field and laboratory investigations, in Eckel, E. B. , ecu, Landslides and engineering practice: Natl. Research Council, Highway Research Board Spec. Rept. 29, p. 93-111.
Root, Arthur W., 1958, Prevention of landslides,'jLn Eckel, E. B., ed., Landslides and engineering practice: Natl. Research Council, Highway Board Spec. Rept. 29, p. 113-149.
Savage; D. E., -Ogle,- B. A., and Creely, R. S., 1951, Subdivision of vertebrate-bearing nonmarine Pliocene rocks in west-central Contra Costa County, California [abs.]: Geol. Soc. America Bull., v. 62, p. 1511.
Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineers, Inc., 1960, Soil, and geologic engineering site investigation report for the proposed Wildcat Canyon Road, Assessment District No. 628-Wildcat Canyon, Richmond, California: Report to George S. Nolte, Consulting Civil Engineers, Inc., for Department of Public Works, City of Richmond, Richmond, California.
Taylor, D. W. , 1943, Fundamentals of soil mechanics: New York, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 700 p.
Terzaghi, Karl, 1950, Mechanics of landslides, in Paige, Sidney, chm., Application of geology to engineering practice: Geol. Soc. America, Berkey Volume, p. 33-123.
U.S. Weather Bureau, Climatic summary of the United States supplement for 1931 through 1952, California: Climatography of the United States No. 11-4, 156 p. (n.d.).
U.S. Weather Bureau, 1958, California, Monthly and seasonal precipitation, July 1957 through June 1958, 8 p.
Varnes, D. J., 1958, Landslide types and processes, in Eckel, E. B., ed., Landslides and engineering practice: Natl. Research Council, Highway Research Board Spec. Rept. 29, p. 20-47.
34

APPENDIX Form used to compile landslide data in the field
Date of slide, if known: Location: Type of slide (slump, block, debris, rockslide or rockfall, mudflow
or earthflow, sand run, avalanche, complex): Size of slide (length, width, height): Maximum height of scarp(s): Nature of surface of rupture: Single, multiple, or coalescent slide: Reactivated or new slide: Angle of slope before sliding: Natural, cut, or fill slope: Height of cut or fill slope, benching if any: Exposure (direction slope is facing): Wet or dry -when examined: Geologic formation: Lithology (sample number if any): Condition of rock (fresh, weathered, or otherwise altered): Bedding (thickness, attitude): Vegetation: Join-ting or fracturing (width and spacing, attitude) : Faults or shear zones (width, attitude, displacement): Source of water, if any (rain, human, agents, seep or spring): Weather conditions prior to slide if known: Probable contributing factors (water, removal of toe of slope or
toe of previous slide, earthquake): Damage (nature and cost): Correction (nature and cost): Source of date: Date visited in field:
35

EA&LK X. pata on *el*cted land«114e» in a part of the Orloda roraatlon. Contra Oo*ta County. California.
[.Abbreviation* u*ed~a», andJtone; *h, *hale; cgl, emglreMrate.la M»p DO. ud
lie eoluejM, letter designation* a, b, e, ...for eultlpl* landilld** Indicate component part* of a Bultlpl* *lide (not ihovn on B»p.) In lit* ooluMii, 4 aft« length figure Indicate* debrl* langth..]

('/ c'-;v~reil

St.lt Of
Und*llie

E.-l

B2-2
B2-3
B2-4
BZ-J 1

Date Font of Urp« of examined 1«TW<«1<^^ 1«rw^-H^T

try* of aUrlal

teoloclc Mttlag

Approximate ize (fwt)
teagtb Width Mtxl-
aoarp height

Met or dry
when «xaalnad; cure* of ol*ture

Veatotr lanedl-
at*ly prior to
l.p^.Hj*

6/19/61 Single RockfftU S* with clay >«d« dip la direction oppoiltt to 20 to 1 Dry
int«rb«d* blU flop* (1. 64* V., 24* ».); Joint* trrod Jl. 52* W., 58* »., and I. 30' I., 87* W.

6/19/61 Singl* SQ\«p Bod rui
rtbflav

fill

20 to 2 Dry

... ...

6/16/61 6/21/61 6/21/61

Single 31\^ and SOU, M artbflar

Coal»«- SLoBV and Soil, fUl

Cent

artbflov

Coal*-*- Slu»p and Soil, fill o«nt artbflov

feolofie *«ttl*< «ac«rtala
nu
7U1

6 to 2 Dry

IJOd 100 6 Met da* to _ rain

6ood .500 1 Dry

...

B2-* ... 10/3/62 Single Slu»p and Sf, tb Strlk* of dipping b*d* (I. 60* V., tod to 3 Dry

...

archflov

20* SW. ) lntcr**ctt cut »lop» at

approxlaatcly 1>5*; D«U dip in

general djrtctlon of cut flop*;

landslide oo bedding and Joint

place*; Joint* tread 1. 10* V., \

j

65* 3U.f 1. 65* W., 70* SW.;

1. 20* W., 60* KK.

ft.\ C-l

1 I

6/21/61 6/19/61

Single Si\mj> aod i SoU, fill eartnflov 1
Coale*- Sluap and SoU, cent arthnow

mi
Geologic crttlng uncertain

6dd 30 2 Dry

...

30 ltd 3 Vet due to ...
re ID

C3-1 I

6/14/61 Single HI<«^ aid Soil,

Strike of dipping ted* (I. 50* U. 20 20 4 Dry

arthflov lnt«rt>«dd«d 4l* 9V. ) approximately noraal to

ntb eel

cut *lop*

_

ej-:- ... 6/14/61 Single Sliap and Soil, fill fill art hflow

200d 50 3 Dry

...

e?-3 ... 6/14/61 CCHOM- 31u»p aod SoU, fill rui
ccat artbflov

$0d 60 It Met due to rain

Cj-4 ... 6/14/61 Co*l»»- Slump and SoU, fill nil

WH)

0«Dt

artbflov

U/13/£2

2204 500 10

Met due to
rain and (prlng*

...

Cj-5 ;

6/27/61 8io«l« SLxaqi ^>v< SOU,, fill Fill artbTlov

l»0 20 7 Dry

...

JX-1 i

6/27/61 Slnglf Sli«p

B», *h azpo««d lo ro*d balov illdt

Geologic letting uncertain

6oo-> 900 20+ Met

...

04-2 ... 6/27/61 Co»J»«- larthflov Soil o«nt

Oeologlo letting uncertain

60 90 3 Vet due to ... rain

W-3 ... 6/27/61 81o«l« Slimp and SoU, (lit/ Ooologle *ettlng uncertain rtbflov el»y

15 30 6 Dry

...

IX-l. ... 6/27/61 Sloglt SlUD tlT1^ SoU (vltb Geologic vetting uncertain aarthflrxv bould»r»)

20 20 4 Dry

r^.c

I __ 1

6/21/61 Ccmlct- ?1 \iffp und Soil, it, Bed* dip In direction opposite to 15 55 3 Vet due to

cent earthflow clay «h

cut (lope

rain

t:-: -- 6/H/61 SlDCl* SluM}. aod Clay, (Uty Strlk* of dlppli-4 o«d* (I. 20* I., 15 100 12

artbflov clay, tt, 35* W.) lotencet* cut *lop* at lOOd

cgl approxlaately !»;'; bed* dip In

direction pppoiite to cut (lope;

landillde coved or. joint* tru^d-

lag «. 5' V., 60' XI. ; M. 75*

1!

1 «., 65* JU.l «., 80' V.

'I

'. -r tttle for fansot*

Dry

...

txyotur*

Slope
Batural, Approxl* cut, at* angle or before fill llrtlng (dacrM*)

EitlMted height of cut or fill
(fMt)

Vegetation

B Natural

90

Qra**-' and bru*b

Caoag* ...

fveaSLri.s RocJt broke on Joint plane i.

n mi n Cut

31 ... Ora**, bru*h, Road and drain* Reactivated laodillde.

and tree*

cracked

30 ... Ora**

Slid onto road

...

n mi ... ... Bru*b and
tree*

...

n rui

...

Qran, bru*b, bpalred fill

and tree*

around «Uit*ry

InJtalUtiOQ

... ...

V Cut

35 ... QraM

Slid onto road

Attitude of cut dope approxi* ately I. 15* W., 35* S-.

n mi n Cut jrw Cut

26 41 30

I atural 20-30 '
and fill!

n Cut and
flU

33

n tlctural, 20-33
cut , and fill

n Fill

31

n Hatuml

... Qra*
... Bru*h
... Qra** and bru*h
... Bruib and treee Qra**
Ora** and bruih
Qra*>
Grim

Natural 19-24

n atural

23

Oraa* Ora**

XX natural

26

... Ora**

i Cut n Cut
i
'

»5 ... Bruin aad trc«*

41 30 (Orui

i
' i
''

'

... ... ...

: Attitude of cut ilope approxi) aately «. 30' I., 30* NV.

Impaired road Slid onto road

i

-

Slid onto road | Within old laod*llde ar».

...

Appear* to bt l*rgt vcathercd iluBp block «:th porii on the
IIJSK.

| ---

---

--... Slid onto road .«

Appegr* to be vuh.i. old ii-j.-;llidr i.rru.
Apprur* to be WH>J-~. ola i:. ..'.Ill* tjrt n .
: ---
1 Attitude of cut *lop» trrroxj-
attly H. 35' W., U w 1^.

'

i- "1> . .

4

v **

MM O^E&

1 '

tt ''

if a&
II '

*> J
p

II '

j

^ 10

M-

o- *'

t i iiS

* ^ ? EI
13""M l
! i fi»!

HONXJI
|E§ 1
^** <y\ ps

MIVA
II
&\ &\

to to

K

III

**

*

VM VI
II
*- p\

\A\JI
II
o\ o\

K CD
If **

V*
P
i

Vfl VII
I 1 II 1
I i '! if

i ?Ol 01
I
i ! if

iuf iyf i5fi isif" i5fi iuf

ll ^6 §s SB §B SB

OF* 8 *^ m S

Q ft Q fr

Iisfi 1 ?|
SB f
S*

i!5IE!

ll
H^Ef

§!' I
^%EP Hi

i Saltnagd? arthflov

|a

o uo

S
-

At"

S

S

CB/'Mcf « s^w **

IEF*se«oo-^3f* s«,o*.*
^"E"l°a>^stff * o'
iI;rls|?1
aQfV-*JP£tOb1*P&**"
<^
1fr *

«

S

Pmo ** ** E EO **^2 IBP R ** B OE ** 1"^ Bit" «} |"p

P"P«T» t> S i P P it

P

?fei«

SBflS BSpg
>M*i»»&*-l-' CL ^f-« ii !-

|
M

^^IM **fP

te *1M

II

^ It A

P^Pr*'
K

tJ*?
**

» 1^*1l»*
K.

vPi OfHQ-H C-»^(-I-S'
^ t£^j

oVr

Ilife

!* $

1?
E*

S trf ? tr S? ° ct t c&

o: ItQ"t?«

Setb"t»

:PH £*1»
B JI

gi*>
K»

1e1 lfI

(5*r* 1r**

«o> «o>

5 B

c'3 tr f
IfB B& *o§-&«

1!g*«
JI
Ii

1

tF* £

fo* S

lope
IfodtpldlBpoiioreaapodlctaet 1&
8
»*
ct O

g S&e? -M^-l afwwt(»* af-*-*e M&9

|S ??j;sj

If ?3

12*3 ^e

--§goINs«^flr?lm&ff

8 8 .|i d r* S M« Oc* *M> q &b

& ". ^--av.3 » " o *-~
9 UO * H ' o -~t O vn q
K»
s n ." 1*2? "
ct O

MOwetiocleorAUgilfne .

a

iB h gs g f 1 I S i I § i 1 ^

IE*

« S « S8

S »*

s s i&i

E 8 T- Irl

VII M (Alb* £->U>

UIM

M

u> U Ml M M

I5

&&

&

?g ?|g &..

fCC

?8?s &g

f» ct & »& » rt .» (Lt*r»

SO O

OO

OO

OO

5o

1

0> 0,
91

*

Ei
f
a |5 |£ oc§Pet-o-§
S_ \H ?K

ii
Ra ^ 21* IP*i-§
8^

ii
aa 52 P|
8&

ii1

i i ti;

aaa a a aa

25 1P

f

gwj

Ii

'

iI

! 1

V3 R 8

K KK8

; i PI if-
M

?

ll

* n»

£ ?8

.«}
|fi:! f'if
9-girra?

« l 1 I 1i
*§ o-S *5 o-f o-f o-f
H ^ §J i! u: i!

rn1»

& a

f8n,

Qf

*f c

** "§ » 1* E

! 5- L

Kaa * *
I

:

II

If

iij
^ |!» § e-f brujh aOnraad*
i f
*J S
a1 O o 11

! ] ;i|
r? l"E! l'E! 1"E? |f

8 ! ^ 38 ee

^E

|I

?

l!
l f* '
! ! SS
1

If J
S

3
1 (lPoclnoupvt*oted.

bpealdodciendtg. JAbpaooarnvietnnehtldy E7a»W-t0eI.l.5*,y'ialApocotruolpt*uf!t*dt

E-
P+ t» *-
£*» &r»
K

!'- £
| O *O M

if
I «3 o H

8
i
I
JT

^;J:7 (
-Si,
!i

BM
' j«3^ *»-. 3a ft ^sS3iSl|
i jj t

s
i
aiiii i

§MO .
S 1 C3

is|?S*.

S
B

| || |68

lIravwnenmdastUlecis<dte irfoaltubnearptudoe-A

}*l-f *-av9

8
i at ?<X.

»B

K pi

d7"4 *3 <534 *"q

35 *;< »-l i* !?i 6"

SB

S 19a6r2r.

lSe*3a3l| Ji3 l** 3J3-s2*8| aj&*^*-

ii ii

1 i!J iil!j iJ

1
si ! i i

i i'

i. H«i «^

I1

! ft i ! ! S s i i i

* 888

ft ft as a ?
88

ji i ? ijaX

i i i~
j3stsf-Ha^ 39 2i>342H j9ettsacd

I

* *» «*
«4 J-

B

a ft

9 ft

K 1 * * * rl

lis6? 3

3 3i 3 1 1 i !i S

pffS 3
i« a
KJ ft
"l g

ft3 *a>

O

l< 1

11

£ ! c - J? -

s VO a,

1 «0

OM on.

^i»

a a §8 §1

§*

r< «

Xr

§ s I3 1»

101 I*

33. 3 :

VPMf-'' ^"Jh.? i3OaveotloiBgigc

b* li^iS . r!aL -BJ ^"^-a.qfz>^r)^«l&v^t?«*t"«v.f3>a{.of9«3l6«1C4*h8^iHd<*<ra«\ R4a--^t6"Kj 53^«1VV'iHf*r°cf?BSi^P3"9?_4^.

3 3

Mq b--5-H>>f-f»>>ndBwr»\ a9 9p -^** »^* ^>> »*-** M

^1 «% +* *» * *

*r4»«

+* ** O "

gf-* v | S^xKw Bi*rl"*«

BIgoddleoiBerniedofcpr*tal >(aapl»aro<axnaltpaeteely aifeliBnaovegpOl*d-le; iwataAheolnothaoetyr at*pl»odAadofl*rBtfi

pUapadro*azUlBamletlj Sotadfatlprdirpfko*lxeaic- kiBtlmcoi»rBtlpeBllj/

pUaapAroaexliadl*etl/ Bdaotpiatprdplfoki*znlg-
nhitalootinoeplalUejr;

gBAdoIlwreBwAtflior*Bpal gBdoAIierneBcedtfliro*mpnl rhst»lneoieouplntley, Btrbltaeouiaeplrtel;,

n2 asBgdodIlre«nBAtifeOrp*Bal h*tiB<eluoeiptnley,

(ottar«dlkf*e iottar»dlkf*e

llf5e*d>'^ige^^l«lBl**2« **5II ^"U"CJiu8'Scf»'faS<.*t£^.

plaaee

a i<
^; !i
3.
i] f">«>8» ^-<tJ^9tf) i] 78?I1S?

ll"

S} il1 , f ! jgft Ji * o

8

i t*ltt *i 3sl f\ r-l 4.O «-] 4§ O oil Q I

Is .is 1 is is1 '.i rrfil

ll ISd> d*

-i1s
a^

f 1 \I*f! f

i I

1

mm

a

-a«^t <4}>o
-»& IaSa

1

3 ^, 1a f4 $a *r\

!l «r a

A 0*

m
5

« a 1 , 1 »H i 1 i ; i

«

m
ii

8

4 i J IT1* >4J « '8

4: c

tAeItMi*cofebnrthasgDeehngdvlfoitroadmselidaol*rn:.kp,set;*. lodM]b.e«oDlcs*.tuidcgflnaUtoe*id,tp«o,rslntej*)(i«sloaopnuldaio*nealomqdtoBrnlnfvpb*tnpe*lto.t leo»lfIddneioadcfglnbiutour*egatlUhnart*i.h],

9 C %V H ** O »rv *d »

X
°s

Is

3 "3 O 3 *» 4 a;^n«-nJ §1V. J4 >

sc

9 > o 2,^5 4 8.2

1,
i '' i,!°.»i8 1

3 V0| . Jfl}j-iac1i i
ji}*0 ft

];.a
is

I
at

I
Sa
i
i
§ I1
i

| ^3
.i!IT^ Pi
8 l« 1
1i i.
s So w\
H («
1S ?il1 iM

jiisi A 3 i i

jifil 3 3 3 3 Is 3| |sS? i ijff irv
oi n n 00

I""* s
s

«
*-4 «-4

ft R
Sg

laoodrlaMdearitfml*opla
! hsrtla*oi«lprtl*lj,

i!

el

is I'

If

1 P-

il a"
"8 i

33 33
11
1
it p g jarj 3
11" J
:1 Jn aJcslt
||l
\t IU § 11 i i1
Cll 01
B 56

i i1

!

llCyCu«rMlre4dgir ohtowufioM, lfoaadftflOtB

SAtUHogMM*

rjicm»t. ioloupt*

!

11*
! i !'«
o
iS
S3
I1 h

ti»ouhondnadftflo*ine, olBtoa*on.letlvdf**.t-«d *eoxnpg*lo»*Br*sndte
ii
laindd**. il de.

bCtuUoilMd«-*
irpinagd

i

ji1

!

I
1

1J I !

8i

! Ii

.. CO

*j* ft JH y

g J 1g ill ,

* aa

B »* B

I i! 1 8 ii ;
* 1ft S 8
2 s1 I
a B B fl

i 33 i 1 i 3

1 ii

30 4>
|l 2? ll
f» 01 n
S *W\ «
& g£ ,3

3| 3 3 3
S !7* a s a ** s
1Q kA O O

£ ii

- W tH

«

' 13 S S §
5»-i

3 5 fc ^ 3 3 «j? g$
i 1 1? il1 I- 5-dWS*.iptrpdirfko*nezgl- lpap*nrodrx«ilalBi.Ut*eljr nstolvorouatpemtelj;r
j i ' i*Wstrodifk*e
3 si!s iial i3hi ia11| II as,

ldoBdtlpre«poaioAtlsopia«te Bldtdpirpeoacoidtaol*pnt*

Bdldtoirpeaocpidtopi*nlt.

h*liolpl* lop.

hiloilpl*

m f. 1, l ? i Hitlj * it .

*8'i

ntoill, omladj,
4*

d

it

ii

i 1

1i

1iff

li 1

ii 8! }f
f f ii it

1**B ^*fi
7? "5r
11of t?

>« «> >« ->. .*
i 1 i Ill

1 I1 a
j 1! !

2& 6

2f 7 T
ti tt «

2vo r~
i

^
&_ w
f
is

»*
i

W^

^

<Ot ^-

K

^ B> '

ii1!

Iff!Ul
I o> cj

ui vi
E1 ^ ^

V. ^
MM -J b\
i1
« \n ^ l!

f^ R ft ft C Ri« -«
« «r
!1!i
M \n
^ J £t 8

nS v\
tB
ii
«J» NJI
SK

*J>
*
* - n.
Ri !?VH
R

1 f
fTBlBBd. H earthflor

ft 1

5 avK PVcT*- ^Va 3f»p VMP
P- a p S-

I f
P' fv»<* f¥^f*-

I f

f

P8$

HoH*- fV> r?*|-*MPf- .

1

1 If . 1 I f If if ! if

^ I! Vfr*' A£.9^?*

IS 1 il1 E !P^1 jtilll AH H ft S IPfi-V*l^r

If if if"

^? V

r^|jl

.j^->«

8

"5*it
* i -*

s^i< Ml t* vJt<w£ **M H.
*. f
"S

m" f^E* gt*l ^f if "6«!|!P?I |f.»! mil! EJti £.£
f. Ir r«««;p|5 Ipg JpiS fj^5 i? * »?

glr~ee a E*-&s fl

ecloopte ebloiplle

sbloiplle

F"P&a &* 1VaIB5o..*. doBlpAtpiiraoaopedtla*e oApB1dtpiroaeloca*dtpiot*en I«Wt1are.5nad,.*6»JB1Hot5iha.et.*;sr JtrOaoemainBdalten*uft e»3(«bl£o>5i.0pl),*le.jdoBdpItiprieoonpsdtliot*en doBlfdtpiireoaocpadtliot*en

ebloiplle AopBldtipreaolaocedptilot*en

"1-^

ffc p» <I*M^ H -"»- » ** *d v«*-w

v 1^

s11

5
>

"B"&S-&H»I&**ie pftr-r5i?la**F!

"i|*^°-§1?3vi*£l

*|i*«t> g|5s*>*Fl

i5|

"Si i«O *»* »» t* »

1 <> P f D & * 9 P a f m m rt H f K

a A* §sl!:«*&l!P»IIe «n3!&Il I aa !la8Rff el a«

O * * 1S 1i ~| *M *^?e||3»«trf£l 1fr"i^e?s?' »&I|||lJg| I*

«{A I*
«^

|A
f

*

* Sri***! H*l *Hs| ?

'-it f «5» f6f

«-£»';^»O*^T-^

fQ\ ^*f»+

g-.«<T

ft»

« s t iI

E SI S*

6 *" S

S s

«H

52

i iQi Ot

iPI

|! i?
1*
!
*H

* 18 B
«r U, V,

s yj S *
- -. H

*
--

V 9 W Jh
- p - u,

1* S

r iif "* '

n> H*

ui

1 1 'l!i'"? .iL3&Pf*i. |«e3 ?J«* S|* f|* S

M» ?tgSf.

^p3 If* 5 1

f 5 i|H$

l||!» J* B Iir!

! ii :i!i

i!

!!;t

ii !
»o

an
f*
8
» «8

HB
*[
35^

HB
11
3 js

»
S
& <ir \s

RRRR
11 s I
88 ft 8

H H H 5f

I I I wW V W g«l|

g\ O

O

II

i 2i ii!1

1 ! if ! ! f ! i

.3
II

!!* ^1

0*U

r> «»

s fi i i

s-&!|EHgE s--»s|§r

?2^°| ff-ie

glfo. M?;°S" ls-5
g,*29^?lj«Sp"v

" «SP - -^a tv->s?a

t

i1 1

.

»RuCassprO» OM3j-I. -o«.'

TOGaaS >?SpSp*^.

g"*f"S* "g1|

*Sf^|

11
!1

!
s
i
n»:iiM»l*i el"*^ ISs5S-a'oc F"?-' ** lf s;g?*S"|"B8 ^-*t! 0

I
?
E
iJ

i!1S
II f !«
JSi
readmit. cwubatr*. SslieinmvlieHllriarel atSlaonadastleiders
«;

i i ; T %I
I! ! !
fi i.

n
?!«* cf
vn-pr* »S
*"
iko\*f

I
tP
t|f
3
*Sf

rr

d *> 9\O » *» «i

oo
Ij C J3 9*3
& e*a -a i~i *
>g*

&

§ Is

1*.
1J

.-1."
> *+ o

1i
im
'
1 8

11 i
88
a^

11
h
a2?-
ii
I1 11

if.111

!|*33

a*

!
1113

S1 *
35SE g
H*." r 1^ I I!?! Is
jiJri j!&*a*i «Pp »« 39«* 1*-

is I!
"i»]i"
3J
Ii*«!i

is

111

Ia

as

Jj d- laad to «**l*l- B- !-J:J<

Ijlj-fjlijdldi«iroadit*ipoa
iia. ?*!*hflialtl*

bod* o*ut tpoly

jSlfa ||s
5*§ 8S3 ^335*---d-\ IMV sO ^9*

jlkh^ 1 8 ^ *

ilii31 ittrlBl!

1-:?«
||s
iii
1VsQ**

. ft
*

is ills !

I1

t7 1 T BB t 6

dflide
» padi.
!* !*s ll

» " cEz:!-»il, 1ja£«n

» « ,1Toyipfical flioalrl "2 <S«. ,ji r3J 1o3 8 ^ * 38

T*

fl

^O

ft o fj 5 ^*

e« >~t

part pad

iji
3f
i itvira illde

loIoaMiMitft*aiy1ouitlnouiadultailr lbl'ciaouevrpie*r* ldAwecbOirtlih*d.i

Ilia!
R»
HH

II I 1 I I I

o «\

S8

11
4» ** *>
143 H38

111
2 S a S*» ** ****
HSH

i: fo

1? *o«3"
|"; I.-i flJi
I
oloil*n ladlcat* ciosl*v evia

st
« ft
3s

lag 3 *> < i »

I i« JT I ? «^»'
o< -w ai ao
& £ffl /9! 2<r>. 9flr1j

tantct 'l'Sj*r; tt
to4br1«lp<kpfU*in« laoBlpoupptrto*xl dbIdir*vnie4tlp*on lteoaopt*

«i«Pr*tp< *v4ioat« . 3
m.

«t «j 3 !idoirectfion itMply

a* °-«,«'

1* a**-l

a
Bld«aidpi leoapt*, lyeacrli

3

3E
-
51

I' S

.?.-"0*«" *i "a

s

3 C 5 +>
a%&a5-sI^S5|3s*S*.: S..

ft iviil^ ]!J»fpXo**» *rv -^H

a°T5-
i? a a

Jli
a" -*a

2-i^s

IS s IS I'&< 2 ft? a-i
a 1 4 a 1 3'

a&laT** 3f&a»f a&lb*f a9la*f afIt;-1

\ | 1 f J! ! i 1 f js 1
M S ta at 3 n <a 3 S n O <a

t Sm " m

m m irt m w\ v\

!II

In'5^32I'8<\lSI tuitfcCttt

S? C

15 ]C &K

ji
i:
1I
i*
II
to m mo
r-l .4

CABIZ l.--p»t» OB xlgetefl *»ndsllo:«» to «-part'of tb> Orioda Torasrt ted:'Contra'Co»t* County, California. [ Abbreviation* used; , sandstone; sh, shale; ogl, conglOBerate. In Mip DO. and It* column, letter designation* a, o, e, ...for Multiple landslides indicate ooegoiorrt pert* of a mltiplc slide (not ahovn an My.} In siie coluBna, d after length figure Indicates debris

no. (ty irli squire*}

Date at

S7-29

__

Date

\.~Ai11Am

^rpe of aterlal

Geologic srtting

6/16/61 Coales- Simp and Soil sandy Geologic setting uncertain ce** eathflcv vlth

Approxloatc size (feet) Length Width Mud-
scarp height
350d 60 3

Wet or dry vhen ex.anined; source of ooittur* Dry

Weather laeedlately prior to isnds]1rt«

£xposure

Elope natural, cut, ate angle or before fill sliding

SW Natural

24

Est luted height of cut or fill lf*«t)

Vegetation

Crass

'

hevark*

H7-30 17-31

__ _-

5/31/61 Biagle fflilam mnA Soil earthflov

Near syncHae axis

15 30 1, Dry

5/31/61 Goalee- Simp and Soil, eoaree Beds dip la direction opposite to 4o 20 3 Dry

eeot earthflov a*

hill slope

... ...

17-32

...

5/31/61 Blade £due» and Boll artbfleer

Beds dip in direction oppoilte to 100 hill slope

20

Wet due to rain

S7-33

_

6/2/61 Single Slu«pnd Soil earthflov

Beds dip in direction opposite to 12 20 5 Dry hill slope

7-3*

...

6/2/61 Single Sluop and Boil, ogl Bedj dip in dlrtetloo opposite to fc> 20 1* Dry

eartbflov

hill slop*

...

17-35

...

6/2/61 CoalM- Slut? and Soil oent earthflov

Beds dip in general direction of tood 80 4 Dry hill slope, but sore steeply

...

B7-36

.

6/14/61 Coal**- Simp and Soil «e*t earthflov

Geologic setting uncertain

20 80 1 Dry

...

17-37

_

6/16/61 Single Slue* and Soil, M, earthflov egl

Oeologle letting uncertain

300d 30 5 Dry

...

17-38

...

5/29/61 Single Sl«3> and Be, cgl eearthfloir

Strike of dipping beds intersects 10 10 3 Dry hill slope at approximately 45*; beds dip in general direction of slope

7-39

_.

6/16/61 Single Bloe«> and Boil earthflov

Beds dip la direction oppoalte to 15 10 g Dry

bill slope

30d

47-40

2/62

3/23/62 Single Sluap and Soil earthflov

Beds dip In direction oppoalte to 10 W 1 Wet due to ftala

slope

rain

17-41
n-ka

_ __

6/5/61 6/5/61

Sla«l« Slav «»d Soil earthflov
Ooalee- 81u»j> and Soil eeat arthflov

Beds dip in direction opposite to 30 35 2 Wet do* to

hill elope

80d rain

Bed* dip la direction opposite to 10 15 e toy hill slope

I7A3

2/62 3/23/62 BUgl* Slue* and Soil, Old Beds alp In direction opposite to £0 25 3 Wet due to Bain

arthflov lands lid* slope

rain

, debris vlth

as aad egl

17 -44

...

6/5/61 Single Slwp and Soil, egl BedJ dip In direction opposite to 30 60 6 Dry

earthflov

hill slope

lOOd

7-4-.

6/5/61 Single 31«V and SoU

Geologic Betting uncertain

100 50 10 Dry

earthflov

7-46

196l(!) and 8/02

17-47

13£li?)

, ead

6/2/61 i single and i 3/13/62 1/13/62 Single

Slasj- and Soil earthflov Bluap and Sell, sh ee.'~Vr,n*v

Bed* dip In direction opposite to 35d 25 4 Dry (1961

...

lope Wet (1962)

Bed* dip in direction oppotlts to 120d 90 k Wet nloee

...

i ''
i
i

I i

1 i

W Natural SW Natural SW Natural SW Natural SW Natural
n Natural
SW Natural
n Natural n Natural

25 ... Oras*

29 ... Qra»«

20 ... Orass

23 ... OrMS

[ 22

Grass

20 ... Grass and crush
2t Grass

25 _. Orase and brush
30 ... Orass

._ ... ... Water flowing In gaily ha*
reaoved toe of landslide . .. _ toy landslides OB hillside. ... ... ... .-.
...

UK Natural

SO

UK Natural 27-33 and cut

n Natural

23

KB Natural

24

« Natural 22-33 and cut

ME Natural

20

n Natural

21

SW Natural '22-35 and cut

SW Natural 22-35 anil cut

Oraas 10 Orase
Orase Oraas 7 Oraas
Qrass Crass 15 Grae*
15 Grass

*

, Several similar landslides in this area.

Slide flowed into out '

...

...

...

Haved onto build- 'Bull moved on weathered sur-

ing pad

face of clay shale bedrock.

Moved onto bulldln« P*a

Fart of l&ndAllde contsleled of suil isv/tng on Mirlaoi. o' weathered clay »hala; 6u, face luiB (tvituUu U. 3'j' W., ^5* £W.; rost of slide to weathered clay ahala move a ou two plat.cu (jolntcV) trcBdli^ H. i<0* W., 75* SW., and ». 10* W., 1*5* SW.

ri-8

DUEL* l.--Data on stlaeted landslide*' in a part of the Orinda Formation, Contra Costa County. OtilfornU..continued [Abbreviations u*«di SB, Mjodetoaei eh, shal*; cgl, conglomerate. In Map no. and ilte column*, letter designation* a, b, e, ...for multiple landslide* indicate coMponent port* of nultlple allde (pot shown on Map.) ID elz* column, d after length figure indicates debrla length.]

M. ; Ifcte of land* lids
*i_rei!

- fc^j
j£-l
:i-i

l^l(t)
*^.a
£,'£2
Itfl(j)
and
2/62
X2/55 to 1/56

r&A
...

!£-* ...
: :-! _ io-6 _
16.7 ..

16-6 ... 17-1 ...

17-2 ... 17-3 ... TM ...
17-5 ...
n-6

J7-7 -~-

Date Kn« or lype of ereirlned \«r»/>«f -l/^ 1. nfl.-M,»T

l>pe of ateriaO.

6/5/61 and 3/13/62
6/5/61

Single Single

BarttcTlov Soil, olay
Sluaip and Soil eerthflow

Geologic setting

Approxlaate ilze (feet) Length width Naxi-
UB
icarp height

Wet or dry when ex-
amined;
eource of BQlrtur*

Weather
IJBMdi-
tely prior to landilide

Bed* dip In direction oppoaitu to 55d 35 5 Dry (1961) ...

cut ilope

Wet (1962)

Bed* dip la direction oppoilte to 10 26 6 Wat due to ...

cut ilope

rain

6/27/61 Single 31uap and Soil
and eerthflow 1/31/62

led* dip In direction oppoelte to 325d 1)00 3 Wet ilope

Heavy rain

6/12/61 Coale*- Slvaap and Soil eent earthflow

Bed* dip In direction oppoelte to UoOd 50 3 Wet hill elope

6/12/61- CoeJ.ee* Siusp *"** Soil eent eartbflov

Bede dip in direction oppoilte to JtOOd 120 l» Wet due to

hill ilope

rain and

««p*

6/12/61 Ooalei- Slump and Soil, M eeot earthflow

Bed* dip in direction oppoilta to 300d 100 l» Wet hill (lope

6/12/61 6/12/61

Single Sluop and Soil, M eartbflov
CoeJ.es- R1 n«p ajii Soil oent art hflow

Bede dip lo direction oppoelte to 6od 30 3 Dry hll'. ilope

Bed* dip In direction oppoilte to ilOOd 100 ... Wet due to

hill ilope

rain and

prlnge

6/23/61 Coele* 3Iunp and Soil,

Bed* dip In direction oppoelte to 6$0d 50 4 Dry

eent earthflow clayey ee hUl Hope («. 50* W., 35* SW.)j

Joint! trend I. 6$* W., 60* HE.

and I. * I., 65* St.

6/23/61 CoeJ.ee- SlxoQ) and Soil,

Bed* dip ID direction oppoeite to 500d 150 l» Dry

oent earthflov clayey eand hill ilope (». 90* U., 35* 3W.)

6/23/61 Single Slazp and Soil,

Bedi dip in direct loo oppoelte to 350d 150 5 Dry

earthflow clayey M, hill ilope (I. J5* V., 1*5* SW. };

clay ih

Joint! trend H. SO* W., 57* HE.

and 1. ;* W., 70* SU.

6/23/61 g^g). Sluup and Soil earthflow

Bed* dip in direction oppoelte to to 30 l» Dry
hill ilope

6/86/61 CoeJ.es- Sltop and Soil, «llty Bede dip In direction oppoelte to I50d 220 3 Dry
eent earthflow 11, weath- hill elope ered clay eh

6/26/61 Coalee- Slump and Soil, old Bed* dip in direction oppoelte to 70C3d 1*50 l» Dry eent earthflow llde eater hiU ilope lal, clayey
bedrock

2/8/62 2/2/62

Multiple a^iyMp and Clayey eand earthflow

Single

Sitaf and SoU, earthflow clayey e*,
end eandy clay

Bed* dip in direction oppoeite to a-200d hill elope (1. K' V., 45* SW.) e>100d
e-1204

Bede dip in direction oppoalte to hill ilope

eod

100 20 20
to

10 5 5 3

Dry Dry

8/2/62

Miltlple Sloap and SoU, eandy earthflo* elay, clayey M

Bed* dip in direction oppcwlte to hill elope («. 50' W., 35* BW.};
jolnti trend I. 25* V., 60* n.

a-550d t. $0d e- 80d d»300d
e- 35

120 50 40
85 25

10 8 8 10 5

Dry

... ... ... ... ... ...
... ...
... ... ...
... ...
«

Kxpoeure

Slop*
S»tural, Approxlcut, ate angle or before
mi lldlag
(degreee)

SW Cut

35

SW Cut

35

IB Natural and cut

...

« Ratural

20

11 Natural 18-30

HI natural

23

HI Natural

24

n natural Id-30

n Betural 18-30

n natural 20-30 n natural 18-30

KB Natural 19-20 HI natural 18-30 KB Natural 18-30

n natural n natural

20 20

n Ratural 20-26

Eetittted height of cut or
fill (feet)

Vegetation

DaaBge

15 Gran

Mov«d onto building pad

Keatrk* ...

15 Or***

Moved onto build- Soil moved on surface of

ing pad

thai* and sanditoae bedrock.

... Grui and bru*h
... Oraai

Several hoo*e* daoa^ed beyond repair, itreet er»cxtd and heaved (lightly
...

Landilide area very wet. Watex »riojdi.--e ii. treLChei above
landslide each tise eiuudned.

... Qra*«

...

...

... Orui ... Oral* ... Or»*i

...
... ,
...

... ' ... ...

... Ora*i

...

...

... Orae* ... Ora*« and
bru»h
... Qru* ... OTM*
... Qra*«
... QTM*
... Qra*i

... ... ... ...
... Soil li illdlng on top of clayey and illty bedrock.
...
... Thii landslide is very large o&d coqplex.
... ...
... ...

» - Qra*§

... Lacdilida "a" it coalescent and has been frx'ijuoutly
raictivated) laaay debrl* tongue* .

y y y1 t

i ???? ? 3

! 1X 6 {3 8 S o> ij is ^

/ __ k ______s

PS

11 1

IIii ill

it i1

Ii '

iiii

-;.
VO U'

i:

f. v

*-* ON ^ h>
II
'I!
E;

o vo N w ra K
fCo to o> tp
1 IF ff ff

I
ij».

KP^B&BMP^BB(L H^PBBB.

0 C6O

C&O C6O Pf*-

PQ(
C5D rP^

i->E\o i-'Evo no
8!|P 8I8|

Ul O\ o\

*-^

-^s.

ro ro ro ro
^3 -J UJ C\

M M M J-*

flf k

to co

^P^IBRB HPQ BP&

5 Cn
E Si ^earthflow Salincdp
P KB
8 ^H

t| EL o EL

4 & E>

||l 1&CO
v pH-

&CO » »P*

P ?&£"M- Ip lp lP

?ill;?h|:St I1 ?MEfi*! B .£"11 S £« o
Ip5S£v~*..*&?*i I51 5Ifr-I^lIe|
Sr«"*Mf*8i 18 !-°A
B|U|*?»f fit «?l

I« SS
01 O

K 5
Ml

IT g
1I i

§1 gS il |l
f.&* .g&"* lp«,& f.«e t ?^ ?& It 8 § 'e §M- H. H P t*

oo

o

8 ^O3 5O? £QT

« >5 « S
ro 01 to M

3 »3 s x

51 1i Ji Ji

|l §1 gl gl gl glehloiplel

^&.c« .fe&11* sltBboeoepurpelty, dgeBdlnrieapedrtalc*l oddBiprepieacpotdioin*l f.*£>

t*»p«p«E*

H*.

KHI

M«

M-d

¥& -S&

IT Itf Itf lET ft

e

1 it* t^

a3
M- M- H. H. H.
8 8888

!

««tto

o

of
** S o

Sttt
«* et et et OOOO

1 » g 5XO ^Q *- yi Cb

* g S« 8 8 88S

i M 10 & 10

If 5s 3 <t

^

co ui ro ro
1111

! i;1 :1

5 !i!i

89

HHSB

BB

BH

HBHH

I s! 1 II s ! II ER!i Il 1 III!

« f a s . I S «ro ro » g

?0 H O \A
Q Q CO JO \A UI

PO ^"? 'o
Qs 'O &> ^^ fr- ryj
po
8 6E

IK
|!
it

*3a Pl s -*lP

gg gl

»p £«
It

p M*
§&

h*. M.
88

1!
i

f
c* «* OO
II

Ls

8?

»il£ M t*

ro 01

IW!g|S 1

.- it?
<i* 6 t-
-Is
1fift* !SF-
!£-"
f S. r

!i
K

HB

5f

1 1 EW[
! * D'lf1

ii

!

SSSi

i i i !S ! NJI 1 1

1

.... 1. .f I ? §Isf l§e? e2-69 §2 ! ! 1 f ! ! |

! §! '|!

f C*

1

ii{!

'?

1 iiii

1'

i i iE?i|

E| f
rr «
I
? ,j

I I

mill
to fa p, p » & O O < **"-i* c^

&I»8::&§EE8I
& ? r« 0
:1 s, :, s. tP.prpt-r&0?K"!* £ M- K >
. &Ct
"13^?&

i

_t? W«:»OHI- t-»t)

I5o8 ^C2-o8PP SS°*«8&£

tonfpuongrnmaopcihnky.gscLjv(aalirnprtdgoiher

S**

p»ctPt*P-pr*

SSKir

O"CO»P-<»l'»hP'E^ 0

i J"aOtLI*- s s t tC^crsP?jb-j-s:rp"i+1r^»^.S.*i*r8t8>Bpf!.

t1&r1. ' * ' «D<x-«p*poPoS5>*o°*-«p*&.

-&: P& I|Sls.IPl&^SeS!:
g t^^.&^&S
5 & p i* p it A

: .f ' E.

I3
«*- fo C o

E
O>

?
-J

S

S

8

2

8^ |,-sr

|r1 j 1 ! i i ! i 1 ! ! i ! ! !

Ul
IU
*l1t>
Strtflov euthflov S*lua*dp
P5

Ul
lo
O
2Istfp-c
!
D 8
n
p

1>I M O\ o\ o\

f ?K $i*» Jo o&

ON O\ Os o\ ^N fu fp

M *-*

m o to 09 C»
f PfPt i*5p8e fFS"

g? I I IS
*t f 1 t § ' if*

j?? | !

|f if 5f |! |f!{)f

f 1P P P
? S»

n tt to
p P- P P P
o

IP B j ^ 11

tobt«rld;it pnue(t-oxIoelBln.UeIjrl entslaot<ieprl-neyl; edpBbolpterpodlhtrn*te-

l1Slo,1pi]t
dodIpStirpeiBoocsdtpiot«en

S H&t?

c\ U>
2

I

5*
--
i^

« .
5

jj i
,8 S i ijtetwa 5 *B ij i i1 !

ii !

beddlt>£ a4ptfrolx5ooiawte*ly fitlhbeoepiurel*ytl;, dgBIdoeirni*enecpdtnfio»jn.

bedding t4ptfrolxool5ji«wt«lv'trlbthBeoeaupirelvtyl,) dcBIdoeirnie«ntcrptdfiaolin

C»ttrolxe j.>-y.f^»» «SHA

Sirb*M-&pf£t.*BP«<Wi»<SKk(Hj.

rrS«fi-tf6«>f-H(S9t<»- rFSR^H

1 1»»0»
c*

S&EF(-I»J<-1*H8S1fi-

3. P<«0 **Pp§&(.-*!P)*-1k?h-

r<«joi*f*P&Cfb**u»r1*»vSK1K- !

^ ^ "^ * a ^ * a & K* & tr ^^ u

i s1 I i

i i 1 S 1!I

\

f^ B
«&
-IIPOr-11t»

|r

U Cb

* - - M - - s l?|8 d « S IS y» ON fr Uj ^ yj SP

I-1 -

|P5I &B ?&

thlJ 1* S3

1 1 1 1 III

» «» i *i i i I 1 i i i i i S i ;

g.0

0 B8

. s fa z z * s ? a

M« <P rp *

I i i t I£ 5 S

9M

M Bt M K

1 I 1 1 111

. n>

8 8 S £ « ij U O> ID K K M U

"~" A

i i i t 1 i i ! ! iIi

f I! ! ( ?

S&
f 1 ! f Illll < a tr

H>
8

: : i i i i i ! i ill 1

?|^ ?|». *»s0-r.^s0stg
«» M. !- _ P O H
I ! piff | s j?

3

f

I

* gSw | H - a

t

« i .J33* 'Sl-.°i &!-,-3'o*
« « "? *J c « K

«* .

' i ! I 3 frl ""I"- ! 3 | ' iff

ill:

?*S^5- |a3'S>'^S- S**-o**-*4
3|* 3?tJ£ I^-^H

S£3«
*i

I li
i 1$

si 5 1Ri A £

I

i:*

till

8
|!
Jfiel i

|! I 1 1 1
i ai ! 8

111 I i i i ! i Ji

is i

- i iii

8lllll s

S 8 ft 88

87 8 8 ft 8

cacl[Moue*i.nnbAaagn*lgbobaodermfdvtelui.arpelnt,i:oe;n,* m1oldb.eenoeuadsl.it3gfai1nodmpeea«t,elriUoeni*m(Iepomcnniolaonaudimodlpcpontvriofaepn.tle*t}e*nt lefdlidaneildgifnbcTttuaegrth*elrt*.eh.]

is1*»2

1 a

s

1 Ij 1 1 ! 2* 2 1 2 s *a i B

I' 13 *»

1 i

1i 1a 1i

K S-

1il1l1s1
HH B H

l5isiSa&!|
3*1
Jill!

u. .

"

B.J! a

trv Ctf
S
I

! J, i 3
333

mm

^

*-!*-!

<Hf-«

Q

§fts^ft3>
I a i || 2

1 I.
*» 3v
O* -^
3P
|s

!iss
** TJ 333
»J2 »*l a«l
*** Jet \O 51
S S Or* ^w
| I 1 I*j) w* etf ift t» P-

iii

S«
at o^ tfl |*2&

-*

fO

*H

Q

<ou *Or** *Q^ OQ
I ft 3 §*rj efl + «\

S;-»£g*ii ^,-3^

^. so a, ^3l^~ «?^^e5ff^3

JGfietotilonggic

«^s^«-5?353>HaB?3 411-*5^*-l353K a5b JlI-MiI*d"R3i Jt!*g£'l"^-°'J1d i«fi3ifS1lrFB,s*?5I*
2-aii P*, s 33* |3i;? lis-^jj

£CC* 2fl ? § Z3 ^ za *S S g lr"3

1-31° Is i, s I S J, I 5S 1 Ilfch

! S J*{! 511* i; ^'**''1*< ^*Be.
«i«*j ^I's 1wo«VP-il-3ari ar4-B*»OvoK.aQtSf»P|%o«Tv.l.
£ .ii .a .3 ^ I C j

5^ 5lPi*. 5^ 1n3'2* 5«S»M^* ''36.

lla* J !i !ii-3!fOc Q8>&>SK^o4 o*< dV>2>0C"O>»

ho&^9bA^vB**iJ*glfiirS^f

g I U g I G<-> g 6 ^ +>

V. O 0 O

|»5 |i f»liJ I 1 1 31|, =5^

".* *0*.

".*

«e'-«»°oH^ * *e> * *

; ll|i II. si|l* I i I if53-» aIk-S&r-l J31

«S* »i tKil , I M|I |3:

9 B>I1 J

I ;;ta ;« Plii i ! 1 i!I 3*\^ idJ* e-a-a lu"a 1 a 3 1*

»%Riml'^"

**» <(

" **

9^*

^*

**

*

I 51 »2
-ort

'n
3*.tot°(Kl*^^*

^^.A1sg-1it*§2-*

3f..c^h2*28*t*5i^

9^.»f^&r' a3^§a&&11as

aS-"'*IfIr

a3»'*1r*51

3*3i^*9*f5r.

aS"*fa-ti

I 111J S * 3" |3i5^Rl* ^a ^ic*Il ^jjd33i333 |a23 a|33 a|33 |a33

a ?t ?5^ J-5

$
f8

$ 3 ! ls
? 3j||J s |j

%^"9o -»

tN»S;3«9

23

jl: | fls: J J I 1»

i! <
li

Is
a

li ill 1^ li
aaaxa

ij J

aga^g

Hii

!l 1 1 1$
is is is

Islsf is js f ! li

a«

5§ 3 i i ^ $ $ i i

C? M «

«% v\ m i-T

a
&

.11 ( i
Ji

i §i

i1

1 i§

iiI!
» -f <fl 1 H M f^

!I1j

>tf t- «J

>

TT

f

WMWW

. Data on eeleeted landslide* la a part of the Orioda yoraatlon. Contra Coeta County, Califoral*-

*A, .. .-^»..»/v~r|. .t. ; .K-1..J ..j-lj ^ygl^-w.^^-

Tn

ale* colon*, letter detignation* a, b, a, ...for Multiple iendellde* indicate oompoaeat parti of a nultlple elide (not *hom OB nap.} In

is* "^liirr'j d after length figure indicate* debris length.]

v
Ht; Ikvte of D3. T*nrt»]1de (fcy grl£ quire*)
- ._
19-1 ...

19-2 _ 19-3 ... 19-4 19-5 _ 19-6 _ 19-7 _ 19-6=1

19-9^

r .,

J7-1 ui. J7-2 10/62

Date azaadaed

'"Vo^mtVo^fr

*Q"prptae1<odf*

type of aaterial

- --

3/Y/62

Coaxes oent

Sluap and Soil, aandy earthflow cley *b,
loo*e clayey M
and egl

3/7/62

Cbelae- Slnap and Boll, clay cerrt artbflow b, *oft
clayey M
and egl

3/7/62 Ooalaa^ Barthflov Soil, «lay . oent

Oeologle setting
Strike of dipping bed* approxlaattely nonal to hill elope; landslide parallel to ctrlka ( eeBBi to be exactly parallel)

Approxlaate Ice (feet)

Length Width kaxi- Wet or dry

BUB vhen eacarp aBined;

height ouroe of

'-> '

aoletur*
LJ U83=

300d 60 3 Wet due to
**ep in enter of lid*

Weatawr lanediately prior to
1.'"l T'HAf
...

Bed* dip in direction opposite to 800d too 8 Wet due to ...

»»<M elope; elide acred both

rain and

aeroM aad paral lei to strike of

pring*

bed*

Strike of dipping bed* approxl-

36od 160 3 Wet due to . ...

aately nonal to ><" elope;

rain

flov both parallel to and aeroa*

strike of bed*

3/9/62 Single Barthflov toil

Strike of dipping bed* epproxiately noraal to hill slope; flov approximately y-»ii»» to
trlke of bed*

200d U» 1 Wet doe to ... rain

3/9/62 Coal**- Slunp and day aoil, Strike of dipping bed* approxl-

750d 250 3 Vet due to _- ,

cent arthflov a, egl

aately noraal to hill elope]

rain and

land*! Ida approzlaately yertllel

eep*

to vtrlka of bed*

3/9/62 Goalee - Bit**p and toil eat artnflov

Strike of dipping bed* approxl-

TOOd 100 2 Wet due to ._

aately noraal to hill alope;

rain and

laadclid* approxlaately parallel

eep*

to strike of bed*

3/9/62 Ooafcee- Bloep and day ah, M Strike of dipping bed* intersects TOOd iao 2 Wet due to ...

eeot earthflow

hill «lope at approxlB*t«ly «5*j

rain and

bed* dip IB direction opposite to

eep*

lope; flow both peraUe] to aad

aeroM strike of bed*

3/9/6t Ooalaa- BaKhflow day Mil* Strike of dipping bed* loteraect* 7504 aao 3 Wet doe to

eent

clay ah,

bill lope *t pproxiBattely 45*;

rain

lay*? M bed* dip U direction oppoelte to

lope; flow both p*re 11 el to and

aeroe* *trlke of bed*

3/9/6t l/31/6t

Otalee- nliaB)«Bd eat aithflow

Mlj clay ah, M, agl

Strike of dipping bed* lnter»eet» hill 'alope at *pprnr1aate1y 45* J bed* dip IB direction opposite to lope; l«nde11Ae both paralUlto aad acroM strike of beds

8*B«1» Slaaavaad dayoy ah (aartbflow

Strike of -dipping bed* approxl-
aataly noraal to eat alope; landslide apprcDdaataly parallal to strike

400d 6

IflO 12

4 Vet doe to rala and pring
1-5 Vet

... ...

10/16/61 0iftaa» p^y
,

Ba, *h, egl

Strike of dipping bed* (I. 75* »-, JO* BW. ) uteraect* rat elope at
approotlBBtely kf'j bed* dip IB genexal direction of *lope; *Uae aored OB bedding planet and on joint* trending B. 70* X., 85*
BV.; B. «5* *., vertlaal; aad
B. 25* V., -rertleel

105d

20

6 * Vet due to rain

...

Exposure

Slope'
Batural, Approxl- I cut, ate angle or before fill eliding
(dagreaa) j

Kitlaated
height of cot or fill
(feet)

Vegetation

SB Betural

80 T

Ore**

Daaage ...

.i ftcaark*
...

Stf atural

25

V Batural

20

BV Batural

SO

BV Betural

20

BV Batural 20-25

V. Batural .

25

V Batural

25

. Ore**, braah, and treee
OraM

_. Water flowing down center of landslide. Saall ero** fault seen la cut below landslide tread* B. 75 M., 8S* «V.
. .^.

«~ OraM

-~

_~

~~ Oraa* and bruib

Fenoe leaning

... Oraa* end brush

ranee Ie«n1ng

_ OraM

... OraM

ranee leenlng. light A*JMge to far* road aeroae
toe

...
... t
.~
_~.

V Batural

25

, L1 Orae*

_

...

B9 Cut BV Cot

35 12 -._ 33 U ~~

^. Bedding B few lache* to 20 feet la taiekaeM.
DtBaged oat Bad Attitude of eat slope ppraxilid onto build- atelgr I. «0* *. , -35* RUing pad

n-13

Hi *
aj I
f*t
7i
st
II
It
ig
I£ n':i

9k \M

"T Vw

11 11

ii ii

5<
^ *"*

<<
'v^ "**

t i»

aB

I'll| 1

ff

ii 5j5f 5!
|& oH

fer* t!£pS1 i ^ptiiaisoisa*sMa^ ^» aoi^r? ^? r

*bloipno *h10iplol

out ohloiplol

edp4tBIplTooi*Baoepldtoa* odptdBlpirooeioacpdlti*on

odtpdlBplrooiaaeptldo*n cdaodbIolroaiBrdpttaloJ*n. laip»Xoera5colaapi*ttolyjdiblBooptaeprndlafnke*cti

^ §°
!? [[
F*
R

5

? TT
U» jj> f

g,

rVoJs»u\St iO*

Ij 'C» OkVI

Ul

;]
Ra
&» i«»
8 tt »
it
!? I

8M V*

!..

rri
*S5'

E

i?ivO*N

-uO

iff

OB Ok

?
P
|I
.8,

' ' fi'li {{{!O tf**»>*

pii i

51; *

ita e

: !H

fg

p'fl3 JS I £?* g
j M FJfj-
f! ' *

ii
U0R&od1etflUTi4dto*d.

111
! f|l 5^
alroido.* oUT1Iadhlnn*dld* o*aUta!r4l4i*l. vertomabtrla»einab*t lIuo*T1aDdhi**ll*d*

f
8tr

CALENDAR OF EVENTS

CALENDAR OF EVENTS

May 17 Honor Night

May 17 __ Honor Night

June 7 "Summertime And The Livin' Is Easy" Election of Officers

June 7 __ "Summertime And The Livin' Is Easy" Election of Officers

September 6 "Hail! Hail! The Gang's September 6 "Hail! Hail! The Gang's

All Here!" Last Meeting of 1987-88

All Here!" Last Meeting of 1987-88

Alpha Responses: Lorraine responds to Areme Areme responds to Lorraine
Pentalpha Responses: Lorraine responds to Radiant Manzanita responds to Lorraine
District Instructor La Vonne Lamosh, Excelsior
Area Supervisor Paula Hewitt, Queen Esther

Alpha Responses: Lorraine responds to Areme Areme responds to Lorraine
Pentalpha Responses: Lorraine responds to Radiant Manzanita responds to Lorraine
District Instructor La Vonne Lamosh, Excelsior
Area Supervisor Paula Hewitt, Queen Esther

