APPLICATION OF PRIVATE SITE-SPECIFIC DATA TO REGIONAL EVALUATION OF EARTHQUAKE AND FAULTING
POTENTIAL IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA D.L. Laraar, J.L. Smith, J.W. La Violette, K. Custis, and P.J. Scrivner
Laraar Merifield Geologists, Inc. 1318 Second Street, #25
Santa Monica, California 90401
U.S.G.S. CONTRACT NO. 14-08-0001-20513 Supported by the EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAM
OPEN-FILE NO. 83-834
U.S. Geological Survey OPEN FILE REPORT This report was prepared under contract to the U.S. Geological Survey and has not been reviewed for conformity with USGS editorial standards and stratigraphic nomenclature. Opinions and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily represent those of the USGS. Any use of trade names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the USGS.

PART I INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
by D. L. Lamar and J. L. Smith

CONTENTS PART I: INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
D. L. Lamar and J. L. Smith PART II: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF GEOLOGIC REPORTS PREPARED
FOR NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITES IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA J. L. Smith, J. W. La Violette, and K. Custis PART III: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF ENGINEERING GEOLOGY REPORTS PREPARED TO SATISFY THE ALQUIST-PRIOLO SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES ACT IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA D. L. Lamar and P. J. Scrivner
ill

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ........................... DISCUSSION ............................
Nuclear Power Plant Site Studies ................ Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant .............. San Joaquin Nuclear Power Plant Site. ............ Bolsa Island Nuclear Power - Desalting Plant Site ...... San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station ............ Vidal Nuclear Power Plant Site. ............... Sundesert Nuclear Power Plant Site. .............
Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act Reports ........ Kern County Faults. ..................... San Andreas Fault Zone. ................... San Jacinto Fault Zone. ................... Elsinore Fault Zone ..................... San Fernando Area Faults and Raymond Hill Fault ....... Inglewood-Newport Fault Zone. ................
REFERENCES ............................

1 2 2 2 3 3 3 A 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 7 8

iii

INTRODUCTION The electric utility industry has spent more than $50 million for geologic investigations of six nuclear plant (NP) sites in southern California. In addition, more than 500 individual investigations of residential and commercial sites within seven fault zones delineated under the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Act (AP) have been conducted in this part of the state, resulting in cumulative expenditures of millions of dollars. The two types of studies complement each other because the AP reports are usually fairly brief, covering limited areas within individual fault zones, whereas the NP reports, which concern regional geology and tectonics, are more comprehensive and cover relatively large areas around individual sites. Part II of this report, "Annotated Bibliography of Geologic Reports Prepared for Nuclear Power Plant Sites in Southern California," includes index maps showing the approximate outline of areas covered by geologic reports for the six nuclear power plant sites in relation to principal faults in southern California. Part III, "Annotated Bibliography of Engineering Geology Reports Prepared to Satisfy the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act in Southern California," has detailed strip maps along individual faults; symbols developed during this project show the location of individual AP investigations and the ages of faulted and unfaulted earth materials observed in the trenches. The purpose of these bibliographies is to make more available to assessments of seismic risk in urban areas of southern California the large volume of data generated by private industry on earthquake and surface-faulting potential for these specific sites. We have not included references to published papers and theses concerning fault hazards, contractor reports of fault investigations for the U.S.G.S. Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program or reports concerning seismic safety of dams and facilities other than NP sites.

DISCUSSION Nuclear Power Plant Site Studies The number of reports in the bibliography for each NP site varies from 20 to 54; the reports describe the regional and site stratigraphy and structure, seismic history, foundation conditions and ground-motion characteristics. The NP reports vary greatly in length, scope of subject, degree of detail and direct relevance to the major faults of interest. Some reports are comparable to those of the AP bibliography in that they document in great detail the results of subsurface exploration by trenches and borings, and they indicate the location, characteristics and minimum age of last movement on faults. Others report, for example, investigations of large areas (tens to hundreds of square miles) to develop an understanding of Pleistocene-Holocene stratigraphy and geomorphology applicable to evaluating local and regional tectonic activity.
Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant This oceanfront site in San Luis Obispo County supports a nuclear
plant that is constructed but not yet in operation. Particularly interesting geologic features are the coastal terrace platforms and their overlying deposits, stratification and deformation in the Monterey Formation, and the Hosgri fault offshore. Significant contributions of the investigations include: data from extensive onshore trenching and detailed mapping; data from comprehensive seismic-reflection profiling offshore; definition of the Hosgri fault and the variation in its characteristics along strike; discussions of the tectonic relationships and interaction among faults of the San Andreas system, the Transverse Ranges, and the transition zone between the Transverse and Coast Ranges; and the source of the 1927 Lompoc earthquake.
San Joaquin Nuclear Power Plant Site This site was proposed by the Department of Water and Power of the
City of Los Angeles in concert with several other utility companies. Al-

though the site met with the approval of the NRC staff, the applicants stopped plans for construction after their proposal was rejected by voters in Kern County. Particularly interesting aspects of this site in the south-central San Joaquin Valley are the presence at depth of the Greeley fault beneath the site and the well-layered Plio-Pleistocene sediments conducive to detailed correlation by borehole-geophysical techniques and to dating by paleomagnetic methods. Important contributions of the investigations include (1) extensive seismic-reflection data on faults and their relationships, (2) determination of the sequence and chronology of soilstratigraphic units for dating faults, and (3) the detailed definition of structures ranging in age from Eocene to Pleistocene.
Bolsa Island Nuclear Power ^ Desalting Plant Site The construction of an artificial island was proposed by the Metropol-
itan Water District of Southern California in concert with other utility companies at a site a few miles offshore from Huntington Beach, but the island was never built. The site lies within or very near the offshore extension of the Newport-Inglewood zone of folds and faults. Particularly interesting are the interpretations of drilling and seismic-reflection data on the locations and upward extent of faults. The investigation of this site, conducted prior to implementation of the AEC/NRC Seismic and Geologic Siting Criteria, was not as extensive or comprehensive as those for other sites studied later.
San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station A three-unit nuclear power plant has been constructed and licensed to
operate on this oceanfront site by Southern California Edison Company and San Diego Gas and Electric Company. Geologic features of major interest at the site are marine and nonmarine terraces and their deposits, the stratigraphy and structure of the Capistrano Basin, the Cristianitos fault, conjugate joint-like shears in the San Mateo Formation, and the possible

offshore extension of the Newport-Inglewood zone of folds and faults. The investigations for this site resulted in (1) the definition and characterization of the Offshore Zone of Deformation with regard to its earthquake potential, (2) the development of slip-rate/magnitude relationships along strike-slip faults for estimating earthquake potential, and (3) a description of the stratigraphy and structure of part of the southern California continental shelf.
Vidal Nuclear Power Plant Site This site was investigated by Southern California Edison Company and
proposed for a nuclear plant, but the plant has not been constructed. Gently sloping alluvial fans and aprons dominate the site vicinity and are incised to reveal the Pliocene Bouse Formation. Important contributions of the investigations include (1) age determination and description of the Bouse Formation and its contact with the underlying Osborne Formation as a widespread marker horizon, (2) interpretation of the relationships among several eastern-Mojave faults and the Death Valley fault zone, and (3) dating of alluvial fan surfaces and several soil and Pleistocene-Holocene sedimentary units by various methods.
Sundesert Nuclear Power Plant Site This site along the Colorado River was proposed for a nuclear plant by
San Diego Gas and Electric Company, but plans for construction have been canceled for economic reasons. Important geologic features at the site and in the region are the flat-lying sediments of the Bouse Formation, alluvial fan deposits, and terraces of the Colorado River. Significant contributions of the investigations include (1) detailed definition of the stratigraphy and structure of the Bouse Formation, (2) description of the depositional and geomorphic history of the lower Colorado River, (3) loca-

tion of the 1852 Fort Yuma earthquake, (4) definition of faults in the Chocolate Mountains southeast of the Salton Trough and their disassociation with the San Andreas fault system, and (5) description of the Blythe Graben.
Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act Reports The AP bibliography has 24 strip maps showing locations of reports along individual faults. For each report, one or more circles show the ages of rock units exposed and whether the units are faulted (Part III, Fig. 2). Lines through circles as extensions of faults indicate that the fault was exposed in the trench(es). Lines between numbers in the circle at right angles to the adjacent fault represent depositional contacts. Numbers inside the circle represent ages of earth materials exposed in the trenches: 1 - Holocene, <10,000 years old (recent alluvium) 2 - upper Pleistocene, 10,000 to 500,000 years old (older alluvium and
alluvial terrace deposits) 3 - lower Pleistocene, 500,000 to 3,000,000 years old 4 - pre-Pleistocene, >3,000,000 years old This bibliography should be useful for developers, engineers, engineering geologists and land-use planners in identifying potential problem areas and engineering geology reports applicable to a specific project. The maps and symbols also give an overview of the relative hazard from individual faults which verifies or improves knowledge of earthquake risk and provides a basis for further research. Significant results are summarized below.
Kern County Faults Trench logs from 5 AP reports show faults that broke the ground sur-
face during the 1952 Kern County earthquake and parallel faults that also revealed evidence of Holocene displacement (Part III, Fig. 3). Holocene displacement was reported in a trench across the Big Pine fault but no evidence of faulting was reported in two AP reports with trenches in Holo-

cene and late Pleistocene sediments across the Garlock fault (Part III, Fig. A). No organic material suitable for carbon 1A dating was reported from any of the trenches.
San Andreas Fault Zone Trenches across the San Andreas fault and one of its branches, the
Mission Creek fault, revealed abundant evidence of Holocene and late Pleistocene displacement across a zone of subparallel and anastomosing strands up to 1.7 km wide. Of 30 AP investigations reporting trenches in Holocene sediments across the principal strands of the San Andreas and Mission Creek faults, 27 reported evidence of displacement. Displaced sediments which may contain organic material datable by carbon 1A methods are reported from the following two sites along the San Andreas fault: City of San Bernardino no. 11 (Part III, Fig. 12), "dark gray to black clay, probably sag pond materials"; City of San Bernardino no. A5 (Part III, Fig. 13), "Carbon 1A sample indicated in wet organic clay 9 feet below surface adjacent to fault zone". No data on analysis of sample is given in report.
San Jacinto Fault Zone Logs of trenches across strands of the San Jacinto fault zone report
Holocene displacement across a zone of subparallel and en echelon faults. Of AO AP investigations reporting trenches in Holocene sediments across principal strands of the San Jacinto fault zone, 35 describe displacement. Other trenches revealed secondary faults parallel to the principal strand forming a band of faults up to 200 m wide. None of the trench logs of displaced earth materials across the San Jacinto fault zone report organic material suitable for carbon 1A dating. Three reports (City of San Bernardino nos. 78, 8A, and 85, Part III, Fig. 17) describe sand boils, blows, and dikes probably caused by shaking during earthquakes (Sieh, 1978). Riverside County report no. 9A (Part III, Fig. 19) describes "three displacement events with offsets up to 1 foot."

Elsinore Fault Zone The Elsinore fault zone consists of subparallel and en echelon faults.
Compared to the San Jacinto and San Andreas faults, trenches across the Elsinore fault zone found less evidence of Holocene or late Pleistocene displacement. Of 21 AP investigations reporting trenches in Holocene sediments across a principal strand of the Elsinore fault zone (Part III, Fig. 26), 10 reported displacement on the Glen Ivy North and Wildomar faults. No evidence of Holocene displacement has been found on the Willard or Chino faults. However, Heath ert al_. (1982) report stream offsets and fault scarps along the Chino fault in the Prado Dam - Corona area, north of the trenches shown on Fig. 26 (Part III), which suggests Holocene displacement. Engineering geology reports which describe fault offsets revealed in trenches across strands of the Elsinore fault have been used (Lamar and Swanson, 1981, 1982) to successfully guide a search for datable faulting events and provided the impetus for this study.
San Fernando Area Faults and Raymond Hill Fault Trench logs from seven AP reports across faults which broke the ground
surface during the 1971 San Fernando earthquake describe displaced Holocene and late Pleistocene sediments (Part III, Figs. 20 and 21). A log from a trench across the Raymond Hill fault describes faulting in older alluvium (Part III, Fig. 20). None of the reports describe organic material suitable for carbon 14 dating.
Inglewood-Newport Fault Zone The Inglewood-Newport fault zone consists of a complex zone of paral-
lel, branching and en echelon faults. Of 13 AP reports describing trenches in Holocene and upper Pleistocene deposits only one reports evidence of displacement. This result is suprising in view of seismic activity and abundant physiographic evidence of faulting along individual strands of the fault zone (Barrows, 1974).

REFERENCES
Barrows, A. G., 1974, A review of the geology and earthquake history of the Newport-Inglewood structural zone, southern California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Spec. Rpt. 114, 115 p.
Heath, E. G., Jensen, D. E., and Lukesh, D. W., 1982, Style and age of deformation on the Chino fault: in Neotectonics in Southern California, Volume and Guidebook, Geol. Soc. Amer. Cordilleran Section, 78th Annual Meeting, p. 123-134.
Lamar, D. L., and Swanson, S. C., 1981, Study of seismic activity by selective trenching along the Elsinore fault zone, southern California: Lamar-Merifield Technical Report 81-4, Final Technical Report for U.S. Geological Survey Contract 14-08-0001-19144, 50 p.; also U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-882.
Lamar, D. L., and Swanson, S. C., 1982, Ages of displaced strata in trenches across Elsinore fault zone, southern California: presented at Cordilleran Section, Geol. Soc. Amer.
Sieh, K. E., 1978, Prehistoric large earthquakes produced by slip on the San Andreas fault at Pallett Creek, California: Jour, of Geophys. Res., v. 83, p. 3907-3939.

PART II
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF GEOLOGIC REPORTS PREPARED FOR NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITES IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
by
J. L. Smith, J. W. La Violette, and K. Custis

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION. ........................... DIABLO CANYON NUCLEAR POWER PLANT ................. SAN JOAQUIN NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE. ............... BOLSA ISLAND NUCLEAR POWER - DESALTING PLANT SITE ......... SAN ONOFRE NUCLEAR GENERATING STATION ............... VIDAL NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE. .................. SUNDESERT NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE. ................

1 5 21 33 45 71 81

iii '

ILLUSTRATIONS

Fig. 1
Fig. 2 Fig. 3 Fig. 4 Fig. 5 Fig. 6
Fig. 7

Principal faults in southern California, locations of nuclear power plant sites, and outlines of detailed maps ........................
Areas covered by geologic studies for Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant on San Luis Obispo sheet. ....
Areas covered by geologic studies for San Joaquin Nuclear Power Plant Site on Bakersfield sheet .......
Areas covered by geologic studies for Bolsa Island Nuclear Power Plant Site on Long Beach sheet. .......
Areas covered by geologic studies for San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station on Santa Ana sheet ...........
Areas covered by geologic studies for Vidal and Sundesert Nuclear Power Plant Sites on Needles sheet ...........................
Areas covered by geologic studies for Sundesert and Vidal Nuclear Power Plant Sites on Salton Sea sheet ....

22 34 46
72 82

GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS

ACRS AEC CDMG DBE FSAR MEL NIFZ NRC QBE OSFZ OZD PSAR SAFZ SCOFZ SJNP SSE SNP SONGS USAEC USGS USNRC WEFZ

Advisory Committee of Reactor Safeguards Atomic Energy Commission (also USAEC) California Division of Mines and Geology Design Basis Earthquake Final Safety Analysis Report Maximum Earthquake Limit Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Also USNRC) Operational Basis Earthquake Offshore Fault Zone Offshore Zone of Deformation Preliminary Safety Analysis Report San Andreas Fault Zone South Coast Offshore Fault Zone San Joaquin Nuclear Plant Safe Shutdown Earthquake Sundesert Nuclear Plant San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station United States Atomic Energy Commission (also AEC) United States Geological Survey United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (also NRC) Whittier-Elsinore Fault Zone

vi

INTRODUCTION Annotated bibliographies of geologic and related reports have been prepared for the following six nuclear power plant sites (Fig. 1): Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant San Joaquin Nuclear Power Plant Bolsa Island Nuclear Power Plant - Desalting Plant San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station Vidal Nuclear Power Plant Sundesert Nuclear Power Plant Nuclear plants have actually been constructed on the Diablo Canyon and San Onofre sites. The other locations remain as proposed sites, but ones which have been formally proposed to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and its predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). Each site has been extensively investigated and documented with respect to geology and seismology, the amount of which depends on when the studies were done and on how far the project proceeded in regulatory review. Also included are geotechnical studies evaluating soil and foundation conditions and earthquake-engineering analyses of ground motion from postulated earthquakes. Investigations of nuclear plant sites are governed by rules of the NRC, "Seismic and Geologic Siting Criteria for Nuclear Power Plants" (10 CFR, Part 100, Appendix A). These rules require comprehensive documentation of the stratigraphy, structure, geologic history and seismicity within 200 miles of a proposed site with increasing detail approaching the site. In particular, the absence of capable faults within, or projecting within, 5 miles of a site must be demonstrated by a reasonably thorough investigation. Also, the source of the potential earthquake judged to produce the strongest ground motion at the site during the plant's lifetime must be identified, and the nature of attenuation from source to site and the characteristics of ground motion at the site must be determined.

SAN LUIS OBISPO

I BAKERSFIELD 119° Fig. 3

2

V^CANYON
Santa Barbara Co.
EXPLANATION A Nuclear Power Plant Site i 34<>

JN EE OLES* ^^^^^>^^

>ig. 6

S

«

Imperial Co.

T

KILOMETERS 25 50 75

100

NIFZ: Newport-Inglewood fault zone; SFFZ: San Fernando fault zone; WF: Whittier fault; WWF: White Wolf fault,
Fig. 1 - Principal faults in southern California, locations of nuclear power plant sites, and outlines of detailed maps.

To satisfy NRC and design requirements, the investigations include geologic mapping, geophysical exploration, drilling and trenching. As in Alquist-Priolo studies, these investigations yield information on the location of faults, their characteristics, and minimum age of last displacement. However, they commonly go further in determining the absolute and relative ages of stratigraphic units used in dating fault movements and in describing and interpreting local and regional structural and tectonic relationships.
The references that follow are grouped by site, ordered by date, and located approximately on the figure preceding each site section. The list of references is, no doubt, incomplete despite the authors' attempts to search several sources including: Public Document Rooms of the NRC, libraries of the electric utility companies and their consultants, and the senior author's personal library. Additional documents brought to our attention by readers would be gratefully received and included, if possible, in revised editions.
We greatly appreciate and acknowledge the courtesy of ERTEC in Long Beach for granting us access to the documents in their library and for use of their copier. Merl Smith of the California Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG) kindly provided originals from the CDMG files for producing Figures 2-7.
Most documents originated by the NRC, or submitted to it for consideration, are placed in the commission's Public Document Room at 1717 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. for public inspection. In addition, documents related to specific facilities are available for inspection in local public document rooms in the vicinity of the nuclear facility and in the regional NRC office at the addresses listed below.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission Region V Suite 202 1990 N. California Blvd. Walnut Creek, CA 94596

Documents & Maps Dept. California Polytechnic State University Library San Luis Obispo, CA 93407
Mission Viejo Branch Library 24851 Chrisanta Drive Mission Viejo, CA 92676
References not included in this bibliography, but which contain useful and interesting information, are the transcripts of public hearings on the nuclear plants. Transcripts represent the evidentiary record that becomes the basis for approval by the NRC for an applicant utility to construct, and later to operate, a nuclear plant at a particular site. Contained in this record are written and oral direct testimony by witnesses for all parties to the proceeding the applicant, NRC, intervenors, state and federal agencies as well as cross examinations, lawyers' arguments, and written briefs pro and con on the technical and other contentions under consideration. Although the transcripts are too voluminous and disjointed for most technical researchers to wade through, the curious and persistent reader will be rewarded by insights into the opposing geologic interpretation and judgments by experts for and against the project and by the variable ability of geologists to defend and sustain their positions. Information on the location and availability of hearing transcripts can be obtained from the regional NRC office in Walnut Creek.

DIABLO CANYON NUCLEAR POWER PLANT

OFFSHORE STUDIES 71-1.74-2.75-6

DIABLO CANYON NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE
66-1.67-1.2,3.4.6.6.7. 68-1.2.3.89-1.73-1. 76-2. 77-1.2.3. 78 1.
81-1

-4-^W-^-W
REGIONAL STUDIES Map area or greater: 73 2. 74-1.75-3.8. 76-1

35 34 33 (SANTA MARIA)

32

30 W I20*OO'

Fig. 2 - Areas covered by geologic studies for Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant on San Luis Obispo sheet. See Fig. 1 for location.

SAN LUIS OBISPO, Diablo Canyon Site

66-1 67-1 67-2 67-3 67-4 67-5 67-6 67-7 68-1 68-2 68-3 69-1 71-1 73-1 73-2 73-2a*
73-2b*
73-2c*

Jahns, 1966 Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E), 1967a Jahns, 1967a Jahns, 1967b PG&E, 1967b Benioff & Smith, 1967 Marine Advisers, 1967a Marine Advisers, 1967b John A. Blume & Assoc., 1968 PG&E, 1968 Jahns, 1968 John A. Blume & Assoc., 1969 Hoskins & Griffiths, 1971 Harding-Lawson Assoc., 1973 PG&E, 1973 PG&E (Site location and topography, 1:250,000), 1973a PG&E (Earthquake epicenters, 200 mile radius), 1973b PG&E (Faults and earthquake epicenters, 75 mile radius), 1973c

* Maps enclosed in 73-2.

73-2d* PG&E (Geologic map of the Morro Bay South and Port San Luis Quadrangles, 1"= 4000'), 1973d
73-2e* Geologic map of Diablo Canyon coastal area, 1"= 400'), 1973e
74-1 Earth Science Associates, 1974 74-2 Teknekron, 1974 75-1 Engdahl, 1975 75-2 PG&E, 1975a 75-3 PG&E, 1975b 75-4 PG&E, 1975c 75-5 PG&E, 1975d 75-6 PG&E, 1975e 75-7 Smith, 1975 75-8 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(USNRC), 1975 76-1 USNRC, 1976a 76-2 USNRC, 1976b 77-1 Ang & Newmark, 1977 77-2 Bernreuter & Wight, 1977 77-3 PG&E, 1977 78-1 USNRC, 1978 81-1 Tera Corp., 1981

DIABLO CANYON NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE (Fig. 2)
66-1 Jahns, R. H., 1966, Geology of the Diablo Canyon Power Plant site: consultants* report to PG&E in Preliminary Safety Analysis Report (67-1), Appendix B, 37 p.
Geologic assessment of the Diablo Canyon Power Plant site addressing the question of feasibility of the site for a nuclear plant in terms of geologic conditions. It is based mainly on a detailed study of bedrock and surficial deposits in natural exposures, and contains a geologic map and structure section. The report concludes that no special problems involving bearing strengths or ground stability are anticipated, and subsurface water should impose no serious difficulties. Further geologic and seismologic studies are recommended.
67-1 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1967a, Preliminary Safety Analysis Report, Diablo Canyon Site, 3 volumes.
Preliminary report submitted to the Atomic Energy Commission in support of the construction permit for Diablo Canyon Unit 1. Geology and seismology data are contained in Volume I, Section 2.5 (Geology) and Section 2.6 (Seismology). Geologic reports by Jahns (66-1, 67-2 and 67-3) are contained in Appendix B, and a report on seismology by Benioff and Smith (67-5) is contained in Appendix C. The report concludes that the site is suitable for a nuclear plant. The most recent faulting in the site vicinity occurred more than 100,000 years ago. The probability of surface fault rupture can be safely disregarded, and landslides do not threaten the proposed reactor.
67-2 Jahns, R. H., 1967a, Geology of the Diablo Canyon Power Plant site, supplementary report: consultants' report to PG&E in Preliminary Safety Analysis Report (67-1), Appendix B, 25 p.
Supplementary report dealing mainly with the results of subsurface geologic exploration at the Unit 1 site, including documentation in the form of photographs, detailed sketches, and geologic sections along four large exploratory trenches. It is concluded that the plant site is both feasible and suitable.
67-3 Jahns, R. H., 1967b, Geology of the Diablo Canyon Power Plant site, supplementary report II: consultants' report to PG&E in Preliminary Safety Analysis Report (67-1), Appendix B, 21 p.
A second supplementary geologic report focused on relationships of structural breaks that were recognized at the Unit 1 site and along the adjacent seacliff near the mouth of Diablo Canyon. The breaks represent two different kinds of minor deformation that probably are related to folding of the strata. This zone of breaks is not a major structural feature, is at least 100,000 years old, and does not correlate reasonably with any break or group of breaks exposed in the trenches at the plant site

67-4 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1967b, Third Supplement to Preliminary Safety Analysis Report, Nuclear Plant, Diablo Canyon Site, 285 p.
Supplemental report including additional data on geology and seismology prepared in response to an NRC question regarding faults in the bedrock underlying a portion of the plant foundation and regarding the adequacy of trenching at the site.
67-5 Benioff, H., and Smith, S., 1967, Seismic evaluation of the Diablo Canyon site: Seismological Laboratory, Pasadena, California, in Preliminary Safety Analysis Report (67-1), Appendix C, 9 p.
Historical summary of earthquake activity in the immediate vicinity of the site and adjacent areas, and an estimation of the maximum earthquakes that can be expected during the life of the plant (M 7.25).
Earthquakes on the San Andreas fault (M 8.5), Nacimiento fault and offshore fault systems are discussed.
67-6 Marine Advisers, Inc., 1967a, Supplementary report on tsunami studies in Fourth Supplement to Preliminary Safety Analysis Report, Diablo Canyon Site, 16 p.
Report in response to concern expressed at a meeting of the PG&E and AEC committees "that there has been recent experience in Alaska and in the Mediterranean on nearby earthquakes of about M 7 producing waves 50 feet high. Two features are pointed out that could be suggested as making the Diablo Canyon area different from the areas specified: 1) no embayments that may provide funneling are found at Diablo Canyon; 2) the offshore relief is not as severe at Diablo Canyon. The report concludes that the necessary parameters for creation of a tsunami wave large enough to affect the site are lacking or are not found to be of adequate magnitudes at Diablo Canyon.
67-7 Marine Advisers, Inc., 1967b, Second supplement to report on tsunami potential at Diablo Canyon in Fourth Supplement to Preliminary Safety Analysis Report.
Report containing refraction pattern diagrams for distantly generated tsunamis. The resulting values were significantly less than from locally generated sources, so local systems were used for design.
68-1 John A. Blume & Associates, 1968, Dynamic elastic moduli of foundation earth materials, Diablo Nuclear Reactor Site in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report (73-2), Appendix 2.5A, 75 p.
Results of a study of the dynamic site response of materials underlying the reactor site. The purpose of the study was to determine elastic constants of the foundation rocks under anticipated structural loads.

The foundation material at Diablo Canyon site is a stratifed sequence of fine- to very fine-grained, deeply weathered sandstone. The rock is closely fractured, with tightly closed or healed fractures. Values for elastic moduli and Poisson's ratios are recommended for the site.
68-2 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1968, Preliminary Safety Analysis Report, Nuclear Unit 2, Diablo Canyon Site, 3 volumes.
Preliminary report submitted to the Atomic Energy Commission in support of the construction permit for Diablo Canyon Unit 2. Geology and seismology data are contained in Volume I, Section 2.4 (Geology) and Section 2.5 (Seismology). Additional investigations were made for Unit 2 including extensive trenching. The geologic reports previously contained in Appendix A of the PSAR for Unit 1 (67-1) are contained in Appendix B of this document. These include Jahns, 1966 (66-1), Jahns, 1967a (67-2), Jahns, 1967b (67-3) and Jahns, 1968 (68-3).
The report concludes that the Diablo Canyon site is geologically suitable for a nuclear plant, including the location selected for Unit 2. The bedrock is fully capable of carrying the intended loads. The most recent faulting in the vicinity of the site occurred more than 100,000 years ago and may well have taken place millions of years ago. The probability of surface fault rupture at the site is so remote that it can be safely disregarded. Landslides do not threaten the proposed Unit 2 reactor.
68-3 Jahns, R.H., 1968, Geology of the Diablo Canyon Power Plant site, supplementary report III, ground conditions at site for plant unit no. 2: consultant's report to PG&E, in Preliminary Safety Analysis Report, Nuclear Unit 2 (68-2), 21 p.
Supplementary report extending the earlier geologic appraisals to the area intended for Unit 2. It is based upon detailed study of new exploratory trenches excavated in the terrace area immediately south and southeast of older trenches. The report concludes that the posssibility of faultinduced permanent ground displacement within the subject property during the useful life of the proposed installation is sufficiently remote to be safely disregarded.
69-1 John A. Blume & Associates, 1969, Supplementary report on dynamic elastic moduli of foundation earth materials, Diablo Canyon Unit 2, nuclear reactor site in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report, Units 1 & 2 (73-2), Appendix 2.5B, 26 p.
Results of a supplemental geophysical investigation performed at the Unit 2 plant site. The additional work was required because the bedrock underlying Unit 2 was determined to be slightly different from that south of Unit 2. The seismic investigation described in this report confirmed the dynamic elastic moduli values previously recommended for Unit 1 (68-1).
10

71-1 Hoskins, E.G., and Griffiths, J.R., 1971, Hydrocarbon potential of northern and central California offshore, in Am. Assoc. Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 15, p. 212-228.
Geophysical exploration conducted by two geologists with the Shell Oil Company indicate the presence of a 90 mile long fault about 4-1/2 miles offshore from the Diablo Canyon plant site. Although this study was not conducted for the purpose of siting the power plant, it played a significant role in establishing the direction of subsequent studies of the site vicinity.
73-1 Harding-Lawson Associates, 1973, Stability evaluation, power plant cut slope, Diablo Canyon site, in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report, Units 1 & 2 (73-2), Appendix 2.5C, 202 p.
Results of an evaluation of the existing cut slope east of Units 1 and 2. Test borings and pits were excavated and laboratory tests were performed. The evaluation of stability of the cut slope assumed a horizontal earthquake acceleration of 0.4g. Conventional method of slices was used and checked by the modified Bishop's method. It was concluded that the slope will be stable during the double design earthquake. The computed upper bound of displacement is 10 inches, which would not damage adjacent safety-related structures.
73-2 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1973, Final Safety Analysis Report, Units 1 and 2, Diablo Canyon Site, USAEC Docket Nos. 50-275, 50-323.
Report submitted in support of applications to operate two nuclear power plant units at the PG&E Diablo Canyon site. The report has 85 amendments and is contained in 14 volumes. Geology and seismology data are contained primarily in Volume III, Section 2.5. Six appendices to Section 2.5 include reports by John A. Blume and Associates (68-1, 69-1), HardingLawson Associates (73-1), Earth Science Associates (74-1), and supplemental studies by PG&E (75-2 to 75-6).
Faults discussed include the San Andreas, Sur-Nacimiento, Rinconada (Nacimiento)-San Marcos-Jolon-San Antonio, San Simeon, Santa Lucia Bank. Additional local tectonic features discussed include West Huasna fault, Edna fault, San Miguelito fault and the east boundary of the offshore Santa Maria basin (Hosgri fault zone). Surficial deposits described include coastal terrace deposits, stream terrace deposits, landslide deposits, slump, creep and slope-wash deposits, and stream-laid deposits. In addition, midden deposits indicating early habitation by Indians were found at the site.
An outline of the Geology and Seismology section follows:
11

2.5.1 BASIC GEOLOGIC AND SEISMIC DATA Location: Site location and topography are shown on Fig. 2.5-1. Physiography Site Region Geology and Seismology; Location of earthquake epicenters and regional features of geologic structure are shown on Figs. 2.5-2 and 2.5-3. Geologic and tectonic map of the region surrounding the site is presented in Fig. 2.5-4. Detailed information about the site geology is presented in Figs. 2.5-5 through 2.5-13. Site Engineering Properties Introduction - field and laboratory investigation Exploratory trenches and boring locations are shown on Figs. 2.5-2, 2.5-8, 2.5-9 and 2.5-10. Summary and correlation of data Dynamic elastic moduli and Poisson's ratio Founding material properties shown in Fig. 2.5-16. Engineering backfill Plan and profile view of excavation and backfill for major plant structures are shown in Figures 2.5-14 and 2.5-15. Foundation bearing pressure
2.5.2 VIBRATORY GROUND MOTION General Geologic Features Regional Tectonic Setting and Seismicity Table 2.5-1 - Listing of nature and effects of all significant historic earthquakes within 75 miles of the Diablo Canyon site. Table 2.5-1A - Summary of revised epicenters of representative sample of events (19) off the coast of California near San Luis Obispo. Table 2.5-2 - Displacement history of faults in the southern Coast Ranges. Tectonic Features of the Central Coastal Region San Andreas fault Sur-Nacimiento fault zone Rinconada (Nacimiento)-San Marcos-Jolon-San Antonio fault system San Simeon fault Santa Lucia Bank fault Tectonic features in the vicinity of Diablo Canyon West Huasna fault Edna fault zone San Miguelito fault zone East boundary zone of the offshore Santa Maria Basin Seismicity Ground Accelerations and Response Spectra: Smooth response acceleration spectra are presented in Figs. 2.5-17 and 2.5-18. Stratigraphy of the San Luis Range and Vicinity Basement rocks Tertiary rocks Quaternary deposits
12

Structure of the San Luis Range and Vicinity General features San Luis-Pismo syncline Los Osos Valley antiform Edna and San Miguelito fault zone Adjacent offshore area and east boundary of the offshore Santa Maria Basin
Landforms General features Marine terrace benches
Geologic History Geology of the Diablo Canyon Power Plant Site. Units 1 & 2
General features Bedrock units: Data from nearby exploratory oil wells is discussed Structure Tectonic structures underlying the region surrounding the site
Tectonic structures underlying the site Surficial Deposits Geologic Relationships at the Unit 1 and 2 Power Plant Site Final Conclusions Regarding Site Geology

2.5.3 SURFACE FAULTING

2.5.4 STABILITY OF SUBSURFACE MATERIALS

2.5.5 SLOPE STABILITY Introduction Field exploration
Laboratory tests
Strength parameters Subsurface conditions Slope stability analysis Additional studies

APPENDIX 2.5A APPENDIX 2.5B APPENDIX 2.5C APPENDIX 2.5D -
APPENDIX 2.5E APPENDIX 2.5F -

Dynamic elastic moduli of foundation earth materials (68-1) Supplementary report on dynamic moduli of foundation earth materials (69-1) Stability evaluation, power plant cut slope, Diablo Canyon site (73-1) Geology of the Southern Coast Ranges and the adjoining offshore continental margin of California, with special reference to the geology in the vicinity of the San Luis Range and Estero Bay (74-1) Additional geologic and seismologic studies - 1975 (75-2 to 75-6) Additional geologic and seismologic studies - 1976 (NRC questions and answers)

The major conclusions regarding site geology include the following: 1) the reactor site is underlain by well-indurated, firm Monterey sandstone;

13

2) surficial deposits 3 to 35 feet thick include both marine and nonmarine sediments of Pleistocene and Holocene age;
3) no evidence of a major fault has been recognized within or near the coastal area, and no such fault is present within the reactor site;
4) minor surfaces of disturbance, some of which plainly are faults, are present within the bedrock that underlies the power plant site, but none of these breaks offset the interface between bedrock and terrace deposits;
5) no landslide masses or other gross expressions of ground instability are present.
74-1 Earth Sciences Associates, 1974, Geology of the southern Coast Ranges and the adjoining offshore continental margin of California, with special reference to the geology in the vicinity of the San Luis Range and Estero Bay, in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report (73-2), Appendix 2.5D, 112 p.
Investigation conducted to establish a more complete geologic basis for assessing the seismic activity that could affect the plant site. The report describes the San Andreas, Sur-Nacimiento, Rinconada (Nacimiento)-San Marcos-Jolon-San Antonio, East Huasna, West Huasna-Suey, San Simeon and Santa Ynez faults. Major faults in the adjoining offshore continental margin are also discussed.
The report concludes that regional tectonic conditions affecting the southern Coast Ranges derive from the north-south compressive stressstrain system associated with crustal plate transform motion taking place along the San Andreas fault, and from the buoyant uplift of the ranges. The extensional stress-strain regime that exists in the adjacent offshore region may still be affected by extension resulting from a change of the plate motion pole of rotation that occurred some 10 to 12 million years ago; however, it is more likely that it simply results from the continued pulling-away of the offshore region from the rising Coast Ranges.
Seismic-reflection surveys and geologic interpretation of the offshore region between Cape San Martin and Point Arguello are contained in Appendix A. A gravity study of the continental borderland is contained in Appendix B.
74-2 Teknekron, Inc., 1974, Analysis of Offshore Seismicity in the Vicinity of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant: consultant's report to PG&E, 145 p.
Epicenters in the offshore region near Diablo Canyon cannot be located more accurately than +8 km. In the Santa Lucia Bank region the accuracy drops to +13 km. Offshore structures on both the east and west margin of the Santa Maria Basin are seismically active. Focal mechanisms in the region preclude San Andreas type strike-slip mechanisms and indicate that the Diablo Canyon region is in a transition zone between San Andreas type tectonics to the east and extensional deformation in the Santa Maria Basin to the west.
14

75-1 Engdahl, E.R., 1975, Teleseismic Location of the 1927 Lompoc Earthquake: Tera Technical Report, Berkeley, 26 p.
A computer program was used to locate the 1927 earthquake with data reported in the International Seismological Summary and to estimate standard errors and joint confidence regions for the epicentral coordinates. On the basis of these instrumental locations and associated error analysis, it must be concluded that the location of the 1927 event is not known to better than 25 km at the 95 percent confidence level, and that it probably falls somewhere within the region covering the epicenter distribution shown on a map.
75-2 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1975a, The geology of the northern reaches of the Hosgri fault zone and the relationship of the Hosgri fault to the San Simeon fault, in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report (73-2), Appendix 2.5E.
Discussion prepared in response to an NRC request to provide additional documentation on the northern reaches of the Hosgri fault zone. Sixteen sparker seismic-reflection profiles are presented and discussed.
The Hosgri and San Simeon faults are adjacent and subparallel to one another from the latitude of Point Estero north to Ragged Point. As the Hosgri fault zone dies out, vertical displacements along the San Simeon fault increase. This apparent northward transference of strain release from the Hosgri fault zone to the San Simeon fault is completed south of Cape Martin. Several elements of geologic and seismic evidence indicate that there is no significant through-going connection between the Hosgri and San Simeon faults. The Hosgri fault dies out in a series of discontinuous branches and folds north of Point Piedras Blancas.
75-3 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1975b, Discussion and arguments for determining the maximum earthquake that can be expected on faults of various ranks within the southern Coast Ranges province of the San Andreas system, in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report (73-2), Appendix 2.5E.
Discussion prepared in response to an NRC request for the maximum earthquake that can be expected on faults of various ranks within the San Andreas system. The faults of the region are associated with four contrasting levels of seismic potential. These range from Level I, with which only the San Andreas fault is associated, down to Level IV, a minimum level presumed to exist throughout the Coast Ranges.
Geologic information on total fault length and total slip within a specified time period were used to determine the total seismic-moment characteristics and calculate maximum magnitudes.
15

_______Maximum Earthquake Expected on Faults of Various Ranks____ Max. Max.
Fault____________Length(km) Depth(km) Slip(m) Mag.

First Order Branch

(e.g., Calaveras,

160-320 15 9 8.2-8.4-

Hayward,

San Gregorio)

Second Order (e.g., San Simeon,
Nacimiento, Rinconada)

80-160

10 +1 6.3-6.5

Third Order

Less than

(e.g., West Huasna,

80

10 +1 6.3

Edna)

For comparison, also shown is the range of magnitudes predicted using curves of fault length versus magnitude.

Fault Rupture Length (km)

Magnitude Range

200 7.25-8.5 100 6.75-8.25 50 6.0-7.75 25 5.25-7.25

75-4 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1975c, Location and source of the 1927 Lompoc earthquake, in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report (73-2), Appendix 2.5E.
Study conducted in response to an NRC request for additional data on the 1927 Lompoc earthquake and consisting of a synthesis and re-analysis of previous work. The Lompoc fault is situated near the point where all seismological indications of the epicentral area of the 1927 earthquake converge or overlap. It has been active during Holocene time, and it is expected to produce predominantly dip-slip movement. It is therefore considered to represent the structural feature most likely to have been the source of the 1927 earthquake.
75-5 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1975d, An evaluation of the maximum credible earthquake on the Hosgri fault zone and associated site response spectrum comparisons, in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report (73-2), Appendix 2.5E.
Report prepared in response to an NRC question regarding derivation of the peak site ground acceleration caused by the maximum credible earthquake assumed to occur along the segment of the Hosgri fault nearest the site. Evaluation and comparison of the response spectrum associated with this

16

event with the design response spectrum as well as a comparison of various response quantities are also included. A maximum credible earthquake of M 6.25 to 6.5 is derived.
75-6 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1975e, The geology of the region of intersection and merging of the offshore Santa Maria basin and Hosgri fault trends with the Transverse Ranges trends, in PG&E, Final Safety Analysis Report (73-2), Appendix 2.5E.
Discussion in response to an NRC request for additional documentation, including seismic-reflection profiles, on the intersection of the Hosgri fault zone with the Transverse Range faults. Thirty-five sparker seismicreflection profiles are presented and interpreted on six plates.
75-7 Smith, S.W., 1975, Aftershocks of the 1927 Lompoc Earthquake, Tera Technical Report, Berkeley, 19 p.
Based on the Santa Barbara and Pasadena data, the center of aftershock activity appears to have been a distance of 111 and 260 km from these stations, respectively. Although the distance offshore is quite closely fixed at 25 km, there is little or no control on the north-south position. The combined S-P data and isoseismals yield a location of 34.65°N and 120.90°W.
75-8 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1975, Supplement No. 1 to the Safety Evaluation of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Station Units 1 and 2, Division of Reactor Licensing, Washington, D.C., 49 p.
Review of investigations conducted since 1969. Offshore investigations of the Santa Maria basin by Hoskins and Griffith (71-1), Wagner (1974) and the U.S. Geological Survey. Evaluation of the potential of the Hosgri fault was continuing at the time of this supplement. A review of slope stability analysis concluded that slopes will remain stable during the Safe Shutdown Earthquake.
76-1 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1976a, Supplement No. 4 to the Safety Evaluation of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Station Units 1 and 2, Division of Reactor Licensing, Washington, D.C., 46 p.
Discussion of characteristics of the Hosgri fault and the relationship between the San Simeon fault zone and Transverse Range structures to the Hosgri fault zone. Appendix C to this supplement concludes: the Hosgri fault is capable of a M 7.5 earthquake, the 1927 Lompoc earthquake could have occurred on the Hosgri fault, and a similar M 7.5 earthquake could occur in the future anywhere along the Hosgri fault.
17

76-2 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1976b, Supplement No. 5 to the Safety Evaluation of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Station Units 1 and 2, Division of Reactor Licensing, Washington, B.C., 55 p.
Report recommending a postulated M 7.5 earthquake on the Hosgri fault with an effective horizontal ground acceleration of 0.75g. Supporting data submitted to the NRC by N.M. Newmark are presented in Appendix C of this supplement.
77-1 Ang, A.H.S., and Newmark, N.M., 1977, A Probabilistic Seismic Safety Assessment of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant: Report to the NRC, N.M. Newmark Consulting Engineering Services, Urbana, Illinois
Independent analysis of the Design Basis Earthquake and Operating Basis Earthquake (QBE), which concludes that the QBE ground motion with maximum acceleration of 0.2g is acceptable for the Diablo Canyon site.
77-2 Bernreuter, D.L., and Wight, L. H., 1977, Analysis of Diablo Canyon Site Response Spectra, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, UCRL-52263, 60 p.
Provides confirmation that the ratio of peak velocity to peak acceleration is much smaller at a rock site than at a soil site. The report concludes that the level of ground motion at Diablo Canyon from a major nearby earthquake would have lower amplification factors than those specified in Regulatory Guide 1.60.
77-3 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., 1977, Seismic Evaluation for Postulated 7.5M Hosgri Earthquake, Units 1 and 2, Diablo Canyon Site.
Report arguing that the M 7.5 earthquake postulated by the U.S. Geological Survey, and the resulting ground acceleration at the site (0.75g), are excessive and that an earthquake of M 6.25 to 6.5 is the largest that reasonably can be expected to occur on the Hosgri fault. Nevertheless, the effects of a M 7 earthquake are presented.
78-1 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1978, Supplement No. 7 to the Safety Evaluation of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Station Units 1 and 2, Division of Project Management, Washington, D.C., 147 p.
Defines terminology for earthquake design bases: Design earthquake (0.2g) is the Operating Basis Earthquake as defined in Appendix A to 10 CFR Part 100; Double Design Earthquake (0.4g) is the Safe Shutdown Earthquake. The Hosgri event (0.75g) is the basis approved for the seismic reevaluation. Contrary to the applicant's position, the NRC considers this to be the Safe Shutdown Earthquake. Slope stability is also discussed based on the Hosgri event. The applicant's assumptions regarding a nearshore generated tsunami are considered to be conservative.
18

81-1 Tera Corporation, 1981, Earthquake Emergency Planning at Diablo Canyon: Consultant's report to PG&E, 179 p. and appendices. Natural seismic hazards of major concern to radiological emergency
planning in the study area are ground shaking, landslides, liquefaction, settlement and tsunami. The potential effects of these hazards on transportation and communications are discussed. Specific evaluations rest on the assumption of a M 7.5 event on the Hosgri fault.
19

SAN JOAQUIN NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE 21

120*00'

36«00'

I9E

20

235

(FRESNO)

26 g?

28

» ". j «\'. -*-!;-

29 120° 00'

28

27

21 20 19 (LOS ANGELES)
16 MILES

Fig. 3 - Areas covered by geologic studies for San Joaquin Nuclear Power Plant Site on Bakersfield sheet. See Fig. 1 for location.

BAKERSFIELD, San Joaquin Nuclear Power Site

73-1 Crosby, 1973

75-1 Farr, Mateker & Wu, 1975

73-2 Crosby, Anderson & Weber, 1973

75-2 Fugro, 1975a

73-3 Crosby, Siems, Anderson & Weber, 1973

75-3 Fugro, 1975b

73-4 Crosby, Siems & Weber, 1973

75-4 Fugro, 1975c

73-5 Crosby, Siems & Lane, 1973

75-5 Fugro, 1975d

73-6 Kukla, Opdyke & Lowrie, 1973

75-6 Fugro, 1975e

74-1 Crosby, Weber & Lane, 1974a

77-1 Fugro, 1977a

ISJ 74-2 Crosby, Weber & Lane, 1974b
Co
74-3 Fugro, 1974a

77-2 77-3

Fugro, 1977b Fugro, 1977c

74-4 Fugro, 1974b

77-4 Keith, Feibusch & Assoc., 1977a

74-5 Fugro, 1974c

77-5 Keith, Feibusch & Assoc., 1977b

74-6 Dept. of Water & Power, City of Los Angeles, 1974

SAN JOAQUIN NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE (Fig. 3)
73-1 Crosby, J.W., III, 1973, Geophysical logging capabilities and procedures, a status report: in San Joaquin Nuclear Project, Early Site Review Report (SJNP ESRR), Volume II, Appendix 2.5C, 11 p. (74-3)
Summary of downhole geophysical logging capabilities of the Geohydrology Section of Washington State University. The applications of spontaneous potential, single point resistivity, natural gamma, neutron-epithermal neutron, neutron gamma, and gamma-gamma logs to stratigraphic correlation are discussed.
73-2 Crosby, J.W., III, Anderson, J.V., and Weber, T.L., 1973, Geophysical logging investigations of the northwest Semitropic Gas Field: in SJNP ESRR, Volume III, Appendix 2.5F, Subappendix 3, p. 2.5F-37 to 2.5F-49. (74-3)
Results of geophysical logging of four borings in the Northwest Semitropic Gas Field 5-1/2 miles west of the SJNP site to demonstrate the persistence of diagnostic geophysical horizons throughout the area. The report contains six figures, including correlations and complete-suite profiles, plus Attachment 3A containing the soil classification boring logs.
73-3 Crosby, J.W., III, Siems, B.A., Anderson, J.V., and Weber, T.L., 1973, Interpretation of geophysical logs, Shafter Gas Field: in SJNP ESRR, Volume III, Appendix 2.5F, Subappendix 1, p. 2.5F-8 to 2.5F-26A40. (74-3)
Results of geophysical well-logging in the Shafter Gas Field to evaluate stratigraphic relations and structural features for evidence of Recent faulting. The geophysical logs suggest essentially horizontal stratigraphy with no structural displacements of any magnitude. The report contains 15 plates, including correlations and complete-suite profiles, plus an appendix containing the soil classification boring logs.
73-4 Crosby, J.W., III, Siems, B.A., and Weber, T.L., 1973, Interpretation of geophysical logs from San Joaquin Nuclear Project Site, Wasco, California: in SJNP ESRR, Volume II, Appendix 2.5A, 11 p. (74-3).
Interpretation and stratigraphic correlation of geophysical borehole logs for the SJNP site based on composite analysis of gamma-gamma log and natural gamma log suites. Six geophysical zones are defined and correlated to probable stratigraphic horizons. The report concludes that sufficiently well-defined markers are present at the site to permit precise definition of stratigraphic relationships. The report contains 49 figures, including gamma-gamma and natural gamma correlation, and complete-suite logs.
24

73-5 Crosby, J.W., III, Siems, B.A., Lane, G.B., 1973, Preliminary interpretation of geophysical logs near site area, Wasco, California: in SJNP ESRR, Volume III, Appendix 2.5F, Subappendix 4, p. 2.5F-37 to 2.5F-50A10. (74-3)
Results of a geophysical borehole study 4 miles northeast of the SJNP site describing six horizons at the SJNP site that are readily apparent and continuous. The report contains seven figures, including correlation and complete-suite profiles, plus Attachment 4A containing the soil classification boring logs.
73-6 Kukla, G.J., Opdyke, N.D., Lowrie, W.S., 1973, Paleomagnetism of San Joaquin Nuclear Project site, drillholes H-14, H-24, and H-35, in SJNP ESRR, Volume II, Appendix 2.5D, 7 p. (74-3)
Paleomagnetic analyses of 34 borehole samples from three borings. The results indicate that the Brunhes-Matuyama paleomagnetic time boundary (700,000 y. B.P.) is most probably 330 feet deep at the site. An average sedimentation rate of 0.4 feet/1000 years is calculated based upon the age of the Corcoran Clay (600,000 years) and its depth of 240 feet. Independent correlation of the Brunhes-Matuyama boundary is provided by an ash layer at a depth of 277 feet that correlates with the distant Bishop Tuff. The Bishop Tuff is known to be above the paleomagnetic boundary. The laboratory results are presented in four tables.
74-1 Crosby, J.W., III, Weber, T.L., and Lane, G.B., 1974a, Geophysical borehole studies, southeast site area, San Joaquin Nuclear Project: in SJNP ESRR, Volume III, Appendix 2F, Subappendix 2, p. 2.5F-26B to 2.5F-36. (74-3)
Two-part report on borehole investigations 4 miles southeast of the SJNP site consisting of geophysical logging of 16 borings drilled to depths between 400 and 500 feet to determine evidence for extending displacement along the deeply buried Greeley fault to a shallow depth beneath the SJNP site. The study concluded that continuous flat-lying strata, primarily the distinctive E-clay, overlie the deeply buried Greeley fault and show no indication of structural deformation.
This study also re-examined variations in the elevation of the base of the E-clay in 19 borings and concluded there is no evidence of offset in the geophysical horizons, although gentle northeasterly downwarping of the sediments was noted.
The report contains 26 figures, including correlation and completesuite profiles, plus soil classification boring logs.
74-2 Crosby, J.W., III, Weber, T.L., Lane, G.B., 1974b, Interpretations of geophysical logs for the Pond fault: in SJNP ESRR, Volume III, Appendix 2.5F, Subappendix 5, p. 2.5F-50 to 2.5F-85W. (74-3)
25

A two-part report describing geophysical borehole investigations near the SJNP site at Peterson and Pond Roads in an area of possible Recent faulting. At the Peterson Road site, the borings were drilled to a depth of about 500 feet and logged. No diagnostic geophysical responses were encountered that could be used for correlation. The environment of sedimentation is postulated to be an alluvial fan.
At the Pond Road site, 11 borings logged to a depth of 500 feet revealed four geophysical horizons. Near-surface deformation greater than 60 feet is postulated to be due to faulting at the Pond Road site.
The report contains 25 figures, correlation and complete-suite profiles, plus soil classification boring logs.
74-3 Fugro, Inc., 1974a, San Joaquin Nuclear Project, Early Site Review Report (SJNP ESRR): Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, 6 volumes.
Preliminary study of the hydrology, geology, and seismology of the SJNP site near Wasco, California. Volume I contains a summary of hydrologic engineering (Section 2.4), geology and seismology (Section 2.5), and seismic engineering input (Section 3.7.1). The remaining five volumes contain appendices. Appendix 1.7A contains AEC questions and the applicants' responses. Appendices 2.5A to 2.5R are primarily consultants' reports of geologic and seismologic studies used in the site evaluation. Appendices which contain explanations of procedures, raw data, or test results include Appendices 1.7A, 2.5B, C, G, H, I, J, M, and 3.7A.
The faults analyzed for selection of the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE) response spectrum are: (1) San Andreas, (2) White Wolf, (3) Greeley, (4) Semitropic, and (5) Pond-Poso Creek. The 0.35g SSE response spectrum was based on a hypothetical M 7 earthquake on the Pond-Poso Creek fault located 11 miles from the SJNP site. The ESRR concludes that it would be feasible from geologic and seismologic standpoints to construct a nuclear power plant at the SJNP site.
74-4 Fugro, Inc., 1974b, Offsite exploratory programs - Greeley fault, Northwest Semitropic fault, near-site subsurface investigation, and Pond-Poso Creek fault investigation: in SJNP ESRR, Volume III, Appendix 2.5F, p. 2.5F-1 to 2.5F-85W.(74-3)
Results of an extensive drilling and trenching program designed to detect displacement along fault traces projected toward or underlying the SJNP site. Interpretations of downhole geophysical data are included as five subappendices of Appendix 2.5F.
The results of these investigations are: (1) no evidence of faulting or folding of strata 700,000 years or younger can be found along traces of the Greeley fault in the Shafter Gas Field, 15 miles southeast of the SJNP site; (2) the mid-Pleistocene E-clay has no demonstrable evidence of vertical or horizontal offset across the Greeley fault in the southeastern part of the SJNP site; (3) re-examination of offset on the E-clay, previously reported by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, 4 miles southeast of the SJNP site, indicates that the structure is an unfaulted gentle northeasterlysloping homocline; (4) no evidence for offset on the Northwest Semitropic fault younger than 600,000 to 700,000 years was found in the Northwest
26

Semitropic Gas Field 5-1/2 miles west of the SJNP site; (5) downhole geophysical studies 4 miles east of the SJNP site show good correlation among six geophysical horizons identified at the SJNP site (see Crosby, 73-1); (6) the results of airphoto, seismic profile, hydrologic, exploratory trenching, and downhole geophysical investigations of the Pond-Poso Creek fault, 11 miles northeast of the SJNP site, indicate predominantly nearvertical oblique-slip movement on the fault system and no evidence for strike-slip movement. The total cumulative apparent-vertical offset across three faults of the Pond-Poso Creek system is 32 feet, down on the south, with a fourth fault having at least 15 feet of vertical displacement.
74-5 Fugro, Inc., 1974c, San Joaquin Nuclear Project, In situ engineering seismic measurements for dynamic moduli: in SJNP ESRR, Volume IV, Appendix 2.5K, 27 p. (74-3)
Crosshole, downhole, and surface seismic-refraction data indicate the presence of three velocity zones beneath the SJNP site: (1) a 1000 ft/sec zone at the surface; (2) a +_2000 ft/sec zone between a depth of 5 and 60 feet; and (3) a 6000 ft/sec zone below a depth of 160 feet. The report contains eight figures showing the geophysical data-plots and the results.
74-6 Department of Water and Power of the City of Los Angeles, 1974, Feasibility Study Report for San Joaquin Nuclear Project, 3 volumes.
A three-volume report summarizing the feasibility of siting a nuclear generating station near Wasco, California. In Volume I the geology and seismology originally presented in the Early Site Review Report (74-3) is briefly outlined and the critical conclusions are restated. Volume III, the Appendix, contains 19 consultant reports not found in the ESRR. Appendix L contains a letter from W.C. Bryant on groundwater development costs.
75-1 Farr, J.B., Mateker, E.J., Jr., Wu, C., 1975, Interpretation of seismic reflection data for the San Joaquin Nuclear Project: in SJNP ESRR, Volume IIA, Appendix 2.5E, 83 p. (74-3)
Interpretations by Western Geophysical Company of 77 seismic-reflection profiles (530 line miles) within a 20-mile radius of the SJNP site. Four geophysical horizons were contoured to illustrate structure. Three northwest-trending major fault systems, the Pond-Poso Creek, the Greeley, and the Semitropic Anticline faults, were analyzed for amount and age of movement. The study concludes that: (1) the Pond-Poso Creek System, 11 miles northeast of the site, is a zone of normal faults, down on the southwest. At a depth of 875 to 1,500 feet, a Plio-Pleistocene horizon is displaced, but the displacement dies out 9 miles from the SJNP site. (2) The Greeley fault system consists of three different faults; the shallowest displacement occurs 20 miles southeast of SJNP within Pliocene strata at depths of no less than 8,000 feet. (3) The Semitropic Anticline fault system is southwest of the SJNP site and displaces Miocene strata at depths no shallower than 10,000 feet.
27

The report contains four tables listing fault displacements, 33 plates which are mostly structural sections, correlation sections, contour maps and isopach maps.
75-2 Fugro, Inc., 1975a, San Joaquin Nuclear Project, long period spectral response of the 1952 Kern County earthquake accelerograms: in SJNP ESRR, Volume IV, Appendix 2.5L, 5 p. (74-3)
Results of an analysis of the 1952 Kern County earthquake. In response to NRC questions on the long period (0.4 to 2.0 seconds) segments of the design response spectra, this analysis scaled the M 7.7 earthquake upward to a hypothetical M 8.5 event on the San Andreas fault 60 to 80 miles west of the SJNP site. The results indicate that a 0.35g design spectrum conservatively envelops the scaled spectra for all periods of interest.
75-3 Fugro, Inc., 1975b, Interpretation of structure contour and isopach maps, geophysical zone V, site and adjacent areas: in SJNP ESRR, Volume IV, Appendix 2.5N, 19 p. (74-3)
Compilation of data from borings at and adjacent to the SJNP site. The contour and isopach maps for the top and bottom of zone V (the E-clay) were drawn using three methods. The maps are computer-contoured, computercontoured and hand-smoothed, and hand-contoured. The results of this compilation indicate no evidence of horizontal or vertical faulting. The data suggest that gentle northeast-dipping strata underlie the SJNP site. Nine figures are presented.
75-4 Fugro, Inc., 1975c, San Joaquin Nuclear Project, alternate interpretations of geotechnical data by others: in SJNP ESRR, Volume IV, Appendix 2.50, 46 p. (74-3)
An eight-part report giving arguments for modifying or dismissing conclusions of previous authors about faults and fault activity in the southern San Joaquin Valley near the SJNP site. The topics discussed include: (1) left-lateral faulting through the SJNP site; (2) horizontal slickensides on cores of the Greeley fault; (3) northwest-trending structures underlying the southern San Joaquin Valley; (4) extensions of the Greeley fault; (5) the 1952 White Wolf earthquake surface fractures and surface markings; (6) faulting in the Rio Bravo Oil Field; and (7) faulting in the Semitropic Oil and Gas Field.
The report includes seven plates, including logs of trenches excavated along lineaments and a map of the 1952 White Wolf earthquake fractures (Plate 2.50-2).
75-5 Fugro, Inc., 1975d, San Joaquin Nuclear Project, photogeologic analysis of the site vicinity: in SJNP ESRR, Volume IV, Appendix 2.5P, 10 p. (74-3)
28

An extensive photolineament study of the area surrounding the SJNP site. Four trenches were excavated across representative photolineaments to determine if lineations were caused by underlying structures. The report concludes that: (1) based on trenching, the northwest- and northeasttrending photolineaments are not related to underlying faults; (2) nearly all lineations are caused by the distributary system of the Poso Creek alluvial fan and by shoreline and dune deposits of Holocene Tulare Lake.
The report contains four figures showing the photolineaments and trench logs.
73-6 Fugro, Inc., 1975e, San Joaquin Nuclear Project, geologic logs of canal excavation, site vicinity: in SJNP ESRR, Volume V, Appendix 2.5Q, 26 p. (74-3)
Documentation of an investigation conducted during the construction of a 10-foot-deep, 20-mile-long irrigation canal a few miles south of the SJNP site. A 12.5-mile segment of the trench was inspected and logged to: (1) ascertain the extent and continuity of Pleistocene and Holocene alluvium near the SJNP site; (2) search for any displacement of soil from deeply buried structures such as the Greeley and Semitropic faults; (3) study the origin of the numerous photolineaments that cross the canal; and (4) date the sediments.
The report concludes that: (1) the continuity of soils was demonstrated; (2) no offsets or disruptions of soil horizons were present across the upward projections of the Greeley and Semitropic faults; (3) photolineaments are caused by contrasting soil types associated with buried stream channels and are nontectonic in origin; (4) no evidence of nearsurface faulting was found; and (5) an age date of a paleosol exposed in the canal at a depth of 10 feet is to be determined.
The report contains 13 plates presenting logs of the canal slopes.
77-1 Fugro, Inc., 1977a, San Joaquin Nuclear Project, Additional studies demonstrating the conservatism in the Safe Shutdown Earthquake for the Pond-Poso Creek fault: in SJNP ESRR, Volume V, Appendix 2.5R, 181 p. (74-3)
A four-part report on the degree of conservatism of the design spectra for the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE) postulating an M 7 earthquake on the Pond-Poso Creek fault with a hypocentral distance of 11 miles from the SJNP site.
Four studies by consultants demonstrate the conservatism of 0.35g design response spectra by: (1) scaling ten selected response spectra for the SJNP site conditions and showing that the 0.35g SSE describes greater shaking; (2) performing a regression analysis of a deep-alluvium data-set and showing the 0.35g SSE exceeds a mean-plus-one-standard-deviation level of response (Fugro, 77-2); scaling the response spectra earthquake records using spectral-intensity attenuation-relationships and showing the 0.35g SSE to be greater (77-4); and (4) showing by statistical analysis that the 0.35g SSE design response spectra represents a level of shaking that will occur once in one million to ten million years (77-5).
29

77-2 Fugro, Inc., 1977b, Applicants' procedure applied to the Pond-Poso Creek fault: in SJNP ESRR, Volume V, Appendix 2.5R, Subappendix 1, p. 2.5R-9 to 2.5R-41. (74-3)
Concise description of the Applicant's procedures and methods for determining the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE) for SJNP based on a M 7 earthquake on the Pond-Poso Creek fault 11 miles away. The original four representative earthquakes used in the analysis are supplemented by six additional earthquakes. All earthquake response spectra have been scaled to the SSE magnitude/distance conditions for SJNP. The report concludes that the six additional response spectra add credibility to the 0.35g Regulatory Guide 160 design spectra previously presented in Section 2.5.2.10 of the SJNP ESRR.
The report contains 17 figures, mostly of scaled response spectra.
77-3 Fugro, Inc., 1977c, Response spectra for the Pond-Poso Creek fault SSE based on regression analyses of spectral ordinates: in SJNP ESRR, Volume V, Appendix 2.5R, Subappendix 2, p. 2.5R-42 to 2.5R-67. (74-3)
Summary of methods and results of analyses by the USGS and the applicants on recorded earthquake response spectra scaled to the 0.35g Regulatory Guide 160 Safe Shutdown Earthquake (0.35g SSE). Regression analyses were performed for a large data-set (23 to 96 records) which were classified as representing rock, soil, or deep-alluvium conditions. The mean-plus-one-standard-deviation curve was determined for each foundation condition. The results of this study indicate that the 0.35g SSE exceeds the curve for the "USGS data-set" and the deep-alluvium data-set. The deep-alluvium spectra best represent the SJNP site conditions.
The report contains six figures, mostly response spectra.
77-4 Keith, Feibusch and Associates, Engineers, 1977a, Response spectra for the Pond-Poso Creek fault SSE based upon a regression analysis of spectral intensity: in SJNP ESRR, Volume V, Appendix 2.5R, Subappendix 3, p. 2.5R-70 to 2.5R-109. (74-3)
Evaluation of the 0.35g Regulatory Guide 160 Safe Shutdown Earthquake (0.35g SSE) by using spectral-intensity values for determining the appropriate scaling factors of a selected number of recorded earthquakes. The 0.35g SSE is based on an M 7 earthquake on the Pond-Poso Creek fault 11 miles from the SJNP site. Selected response spectra of recorded ground motions were analyzed to determine the relationship among spectral intensity, magnitude, and source distance. The analyses were performed for three different soil categories: rock, soil and deep alluvium. Deep alluvium was found to be most representative of the SJNP site. The report concludes that the 0.35g SSE response spectra are conservative.
The report contains eight plates.
30

77-5 Keith, Feibusch and Associates, Engineers, 1977b, Probabilistic evaluation of the design response spectrum for the Pond-Poso Creek fault SSE: in SJNP ESRR, Volume V, Appendix 2.5R, Subappendix 4, p. 2.5R-110 to 2.5R-181. (74-3) A probability model for the Pond-Poso Creek fault based on an
analytical procedure developed by Cornell (1968). The study discusses determination of an earthquake magnitude-recurrence relationship using fault-displacement history, magnitude vs. fault displacement, and magnitude vs. rupture length data from the Pond-Poso Creek fault. The study also includes discussions of: (1) statistical implications of the spatial distribution of earthquakes along the fault; (2) attenuation of ground motion; (3) return period of ground motion amplitudes; and (4) sensitivity of the study's probabilistic results to variations in the parameters. This report concludes that the 0.35g Safe Shutdown Earthquake design response spectra are representative of a level of shaking that will occur once in one million to ten million years.
31

BOLSA ISLAND NUCLEAR POWER - DESALTING PLANT SITE 33

I20°00' 34°00'
U)

(LOS ANGELES)

II8°00'
15 14 13 12 liw 34°00'

2S
anta Fe .Downey!

El Segundp J^ Hawthorne >>; uy t*P OD t .Norwalk

\/ -. Manhattan B«ach A |
Hermosa Beacrf^. .^
REDOND6 BEACH,' 1

\COMPTQN p- .pELLFLOWER

- Gar(j^

. P. ,

.; 1 . ^ ' Artes|a-

T ' /A Tor ranee / * ,\

BOLSA ISLAND NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE 65-1,2,3.5.6,67-2,3,4, 5,7,8.10.11,12.13,15

65-4.7 67 14

33°00' I20°00'

16 Miles

Fig. 4 - Areas covered by geologic studies for Bolsa Island Nuclear Power-Desalting Plant Site on Long Beach sheet. See Fig. 1 for location.

|I8°00'

LONG BEACH, Bolsa Island Site

65-1 Bechtel, 1965 65-2 Benioff, 1965 65-3 Dames & Moore, 1965 65-4 Edgerton, Germeshausen & Grier, 1965 65-5 Housner, 1965 65-6 Jahns, 1965 65-7 Neel, 1965 67-1 Alpine Geophysical, 1967 67-2 Bechtel, 1967 67-3 Benioff, Housner & Jahns, 1967 67-4 Dames & Moore, 1967

67-5 67-6 67-7 67-8 67-9 67-10 67-11 67-12 67-13 67-14 67-15

Dobrin, 1967 Geophysical Services, Inc., 1967 Hughes, 1967 Idriss, 1967 Law, 1967 Linehan, 1967 Neel, 1967 U.S. Dept. Interior, 1967 Woodward-Clyde-Sherard & Assoc., 1967 Edgerton, Germeshausen & Grier, Inc., 1967 Dept. of Water and Power, City of Los Angeles, 1967

BOLSA ISLAND NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE (Fig. 4)
65-1 Bechtel Corp., December 1965, Engineering and Economic Feasibility Study, Phase I, II, and III, for a Combined Nuclear Power and Desalting Plant, Volumes I, II, and III.
Feasibility study of three potential plant sites at Irvine Ranch, Dana Point, and offshore Sunset Beach, California. Geologic and seismologic data are contained in Chapter 7 of Volume I (Nuclear Site Safety Analysis); Chapter 3 of Volume II (Site Analysis); Chapter 4 of Volume III (Site Analysis); and Appendices of Volumes I and II.
Volume I, phases I and II, has a brief summary of the geology and seismology of Irvine Ranch, Dana Point, and Bolsa Island sites. Appendix B contains letters on seismology by G.W. Housner (65-5) and H. Benioff (65-2).
Volume II, phase III, has a geologic analysis of Bolsa Island and Pelican Point (Irvine Ranch). Sparker surveys for Bolsa Island (EG&G, 65-4) indicate that below Bolsa Island two deep faults are covered by 900 feet of undisturbed sediments. Recommended seismic design criteria are 0.33g ground acceleration for Bolsa Island and 0.25g for Pelican Point. Appendix A contains geologic and seismologic reports by R.H. Jahns (65-6) and H.H. Neel (65-7) discussing the Irvine Ranch, Moro Canyon, Pelican Point, and Bolsa Island sites.
Volume III is a summary report on the Bolsa Island and Pelican Point sites.
65-2 Benioff, H., April 30, 1965, Seismic Report: in Bechtel Corp., December 1965, Engineering and Economic Feasibility Study, Volume I, Phase I and II, Appendix B-4, 3 p.
Letter describing the maximum intensity of shaking, tsunami hazard, and potential for liquefaction and faulting beneath the Bolsa Island site. The maximum intensity of shaking for the seismic period range up to 1.5 seconds would come from a M 6.0 earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood fault; for longer periods the maximum intensity would come from a M 8.0 earthquake on the San Andreas fault 50 miles away.
65-3 Dames and Moore, November 8, 1965, Preliminary soils and foundation investigation at Bolsa Island: in Bechtel Corp., 1965, Engineering and Economic Feasibility Study, Volume II, Phase III, Appendix F, 35 p. and appendices. (65-1)
Soils and foundation engineering study of the ocean floor at the site and a stability analysis of the proposed island. Appendix A is a discussion of the field program, including a discussion of the scope and results of the EG&G (65-4) Sonoprobe survey. Plates A-7A, A-7B, and A-8 present the sparker-boomer survey lines and partial records from the EG&G study.
36

65-4 Edgerton, Germeshausen, and Grier, Inc. (EG&G), September 1965, Spark Array and High-Resolution Boomer Surveys for Bolsa Island.
Seismic reflection study of the ocean floor at the proposed Bolsa Island site. This study indicates that the Huntington Beach "A" fault extends up to the ocean floor and may produce a topographic scarp. No complete copy of this report was located, but Bechtel Corp. reportedly has one in their San Francisco office. Summaries of this report are included in studies by Dames and Moore (65-3), Neel (65-7), and Bechtel Corp. (651).
65-5 Housner, G.W., May 10, 1965, Report to the Bechtel Corporation on seismic design criteria for a nuclear-fired desalting plant: in Bechtel Corp., December 1965, Engineering Feasibility Study, Volume I, Phase I and II, Appendix B-3, 6 p. (65-1)
A report recommending seismic design criteria for the Irvine Ranch, Dana Point, and Artificial Island sites. For the Irvine Ranch and Dana Point sites the response spectrum should be based on a M 8.0 earthquake on the San Andreas fault and should have a maximum ground acceleration of 0.25g. A response spectrum with a maximum ground acceleration of 0.33g from a M 7.0 earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood fault zone is recommended for the Bolsa Island site.
65-6 Jahns, R.H., November 17, 1965, Geologic and seismic factors pertinent to Irvine Ranch and Artificial Island sites: in Bechtel Corp., December 1965, Engineering and Economic Feasibility Study, Volume II, Phase III, Appendix A, 6 p. (65-1)
Brief description of the geology for the Pelican Point (Irvine Ranch) and Bolsa Island sites. The Newport-Inglewood fault zone is the most likely fault to affect the Bolsa Island site. An earthquake of no greater than M 7.0 and surface displacements not exceeding 3 feet can be expected. Ground displacement within or near the proposed site is unlikely. The effect of seismic shaking for Bolsa Island can be considered applicable to Pelican Point. The report concludes that there is no evidence for faults beneath the Pelican Point site, but breaks may exist beneath the terrace cover.
65-7 Neel, H.H., November 8, 1965, Geologic investigation of the Moro Canyon site, Pelican Point site, and the Sunset Beach-Huntington Beach area: in Bechtel Corp., December 1965, Engineering and Economic Feasibility Study, Volume II, Phase III, Appendix A, 17 p. (65-1)
Three-part report summarizing the geologic investigation of three potential sites for a nuclear-fired desalting plant. A detailed Bolsa Island report concludes that only one fault of the Newport-Inglewood fault zone, the Huntington Beach "A" fault, shows any indication of Recent movement. The proposed island site will be at least 1 mile away from this
37

fault. A geologic map of the Bolsa Island site, scale 1 inch * 2,000 feet, is included.
The Pelican Point (Irvine Ranch) report concludes that the nearest major fault is part of the Pelican Hill fault system, which has no known Recent movement. A geologic map at a scale of 1 inch « 1,500 feet is included.
The Moro Canyon report concludes that the nearest fault is 1,000 feet east of the site and shows no evidence of Recent movement.
67-1 Alpine Geophysical Associates, Inc., 1967, Sparker arcer continuous seismic profiling survey: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix A, 28 p. (67-2)
Report on a continuous seismic-reflection survey for the Bolsa Island Nuclear Plant Site. This report does not repeat data from earlier preliminary reports (EG&G, 65-4; Bechtel, 65-1), but does add additional data and clarification of the previous results. The preliminary reports concluded that: (1) the upper 40 feet of sediments are horizontal or very gently sloping; (2) a good reflector, designated Horizon "A," occurs at a depth of about 200 feet and is traceable over the entire study area; (3) a second reflector, designated Horizon "B," about 50 to 80 feet below and parallel to Horizon "A," can be traced over most of the study area; (4) the geologic substructure of the upper sediments is that of a gentle, approximately west-northwest anticline; (5) no evidence for faulting could be found in Horizon "A" or "B"; and (6) sample profiles across the Palos Verdes fault demonstrate the ability of this system to recognize faults.
Data collected for this study include: (1) profiles across the Palos Verdes fault and the Huntington Harbor (Inglewood) fault, and profiles through the Bolsa Island site; (2) a contour map of Horizon "A," and (3) discussion of the geophysical and geologic features of the proposed island site. The report concludes there is no evidence of faulting within a 2square mile area centered on the proposed site. However, the report does not rule out the possible existence of a strike-slip fault having no apparent vertical offset. There is also a review and rebuttal of previous data (Geophysical Services, Inc., 67-6) that had indicated faulting beneath Bolsa Island.
67-2 Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, 146 p.
Investigation to determine: (1) site geology; (2) seismicity; (3) geologic suitability; (4) engineering properties of the site's ocean-bottom soils; (5) engineering properties of the island fill material; and (6) design criteria recommendations. The scope included: (1) research of published and unpublished data from oil companies and various governmental agencies; (2) seismic-reflection profiling of the site area; (3) site drilling, sampling, and downhole geophysical logging to determine geologic structure and obtain soil samples; (4) laboratory testing of site and borrow-site soils; and (5) foundation and seismic engineering analyses.
The geology and seismicity section of the report discusses the following results of the exploration program: (1) two geophysical horizons,
38

'A"II A tl and "B," are mappable across the site, with a profile resolution such that vertical offsets of 2 feet or greater could be identified, but no offsets were found beneath the site; (2) the drill hole data confirm that Horizon "A" is a lithologic unit; (3) microfossil analyses indicate the top of Horizon "A" is the top of the lower Pleistocene (500,000 y. B.P.); and (4) Carbon-14 analysis indicates that the Pleistocene/Recent boundary at the site is about 60 feet below sea level.
Also discussed on both a regional and site-specific scale are geomorphology, stratigraphy, structure, subsidence, and seismicity. The greatest source of local seismicity for the plant is the Newport-Inglewood fault zone 1 mile east of the site and the Palos Verdes fault 7 miles to the west. The San Andreas or San Jacinto faults pose the greatest regional seismic risk.
The report recommends that the Class I structures, those essential to the safe operation of the plant, be designed based on a response spectrum normalized to O.SOg acceleration, Operating Basis Earthquake. This recommendation is based on the assumption that a M 6.5 earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood fault zone or a M 8.0 earthquake on the more distant San Andreas or San Jacinto fault zones will occur within the life of the plant. The Safe Shutdown Earthquake response spectrum should be normalized to 0.45g acceleration, corresponding to a local M 7.5 or a distant M 8.5 event. Subsidence from various sources is estimated at 2.75 feet over the 50-year life expectancy of the plant. Sources of subsidence include: (1) tectonic downwarping at 0.02 feet per year; (2) ground water withdrawal, (no estimated amount); and (3) oil and gas withdrawal, 1.75 feet in 50 years.
67-3 Benioff, H., Housner, G.W., and Jahns, R.H., 1967, Geologic and seismic factors pertinent to design criteria: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix D, 6 p. (67-2)
Summary of the geology and seismology of the proposed Bolsa Island Nuclear Power/Desalting Plant Site. The geologic structure beneath the island site and nearby Newport-Inglewood fault zone are briefly reviewed. The possibility of future ground displacement within the site area was considered from four sources: (1) upward propagation of displacement along a fault beneath the site; (2) lurching of the ground during a major earthquake; (3) ground subsidence following subsurface-fluid withdrawal; and (4) subsidence due to compaction of unconsolidated sediments. The report concludes there is little possibility of a surface rupture beneath the proposed site and recommends a M 6.5 earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood fault zone or a M 8.0 earthquake on the San Andreas or San Jacinto faults be used for seismic design.
67-4 Dames and Moore, 1967, Results of laboratory tests, site investigation and technical services: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix G, 6 p. (67-2)
Results of laboratory tests performed on numerous samples taken from seven drill holes at the proposed Bolsa Island site. Tables and figures
39

presenting moisture content and dry density, consolidation test data, specific gravity, and grain-size gradation curves are included.
67-5 Dobrin, M.B., 1967, Interpretation of Seismic Data from Vicinity of the Bolsa Island Site, 9 p.
Review of five offshore seismic-reflection studies performed for the Bolsa Island site. The report concludes that well-defined evidence exists for faulting in the offshore area surrounding the site, but that no evidence exists for faulting with vertical offsets greater than 5 to 10 feet beneath the site at depths shallower than 500 feet.
67-6 Geophysical Services, Inc., 1967, Reconnaissance structural interpretation - offshore Sunset Beach: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix C, 5 p. (67-2)
Structural map of a shallow geophysical horizon, thought to be the top of the lower Pico Formation, which was interpreted for the area around the proposed Bolsa Island site. The data used for the study consisted of 15 seismic-reflection profiles (migrated depth sections), nine SUE reflectiontime record sections, and dip-log data from four adjacent oil wells. Because the quality of the seismic data was rated as poor, the resultant interpretation was rated fair to poor. The structural interpretation indicates a possibility of five faults near the Bolsa Island site.
67-7 Hughes, A.W., 1967, Report on seven core-residue concentrations: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix E, 1 p. (67-2)
Age and microfossil identification from core-residue concentrations taken between the 75- to 418-foot depths in Bechtel drill hole #101 at Bolsa Island. The results indicate that: (1) the 75- to 90-foot interval consists of Recent sands; (2) the 116- to 182-foot interval is Palos Verdes-upper Pleistocene-upper Hallian; and (3) the 233- to 418-foot interval is upper Pico-lower Pleistocene-lower Hallian.
67-8 Idriss, I.M., 1967, Methods for evaluating the seismic response of Bolsa Island: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix I, 6 p. (67-2)
Brief summary of the methods used in a finite element analysis of the proposed Bolsa Island site. The analysis evaluated the liquefaction potential and slope stability for the site using seismic -motions recommended by Bechtel and the Site Advisory Committee (Benioff, Housner and Jahns).
40

67-9 Law, J., 1967, An estimate of future horizontal movement, vertical movement and surface strain: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix J, 14 p. (67-2)
Geology of the proposed Bolsa Island site, amounts of subsidence to date, and estimates of the future ultimate subsidence with accompanying ultimate horizontal and differential horizontal movement (strain). Discusses the possibility for Raleigh-wave earth tremors and the development of fissures or scarps due to subsidence. The appendices include discussions of the effects of the Wilmington and Goose Creek Oil Field subsidence. Contains 14 figures which show the existing and estimated effects of subsidence.
67-10 Linehan, D., 1967, Review of geophysical explorations: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix B, 3 p. (67-2)
Summary of results of the Alpine Geophysical Associates (67-1) seismic profile studies of the Bolsa Island site. The author concludes that, under optimum conditions, vertical displacements of 2 feet or greater can be identified by the sparker studies. Horizontal displacement on plunging arch-like structures, such as under Bolsa Island, should give apparent vertical displacement within a few hundred feet of purely horizontal movement. The author concludes from the sparker-arcer surveys that there is no evidence for faults underlying the Bolsa Island site.
67-11 Neel, H.H., 1967, Review of Bolsa Island Site geologic work: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix F, 6 p. (67-2)
Letter describing the three-phase history of site selection and the accuracy of supplemental work done by various consultants to determine whether faults exist beneath or near the proposed site. It is concluded that no discernible active faulting has taken place since the Pleistocene in or immediately near the Bolsa Island site and that no other geologic conditions exist which will adversely affect the site. A two-page supplemental letter from R.F. Herron (July 28, 1967) is also included for documentation. The Herron letter discusses the results and the accuracy of a seismic profile study undertaken for Bolsa Island under his supervision by EG&G Consultants (67-4).
67-12 United States Department of the Interior, October 1967, Geologicseismological factors pertaining to the proposed construction of a nuclear power - desalting plant at Bolsa Island, California, 62 p.
Department of the Interior Advisory Committee report summarizing a geologic review of the proposed Bolsa Island Nuclear Power and Desalting Plant. The data base for this report is primarily that collected by Bechtel Corp.(67-2). This report discusses in detail the Newport-Inglewood fault zone (1 mile east of the site), structures beneath the site, the Safe
41

Shutdown Earthquake, local and regional subsidence, island foundation conditions, and the geo-seismic design criteria. The committee recommended that M8.0 and 8.5 earthquakes occurring on the Newport-Inglewood and San Andreas faults, respectively, be considered for the Safe Shutdown Earthquake. Appendix A is a letter from M.B. Dobrin (67-5) to the committee discussing the interpretation of seismic data.
67-13 Woodward-Clyde-Sherard and Associates, 1967, Results of laboratory tests on soils samples: in Bechtel Corp., 1967, Detailed Investigation of the Bolsa Island Site, Appendix H, 35 p. (67-2)
Results of laboratory tests performed on undisturbed and disturbed soil samples taken from drill holes at the proposed Bolsa Island site and on fill material from borrow areas. The testing included soil classification, relative density, consolidation, undrained-triaxial tests, and dynamic triaxial-compression tests. Contains seven tables and 102 figures.
67-14 Edgerton, Germeshausen, and Grier, Inc. (EG&G), July 28, 1967, Sparker and high-resolution boomer surveys for Bolsa Island, Phase III.
Results of a second seismic-reflection study of the ocean floor at the proposed Bolsa Island site. This study found no faults closer to the seafloor than 400 feet except possibly the Huntington "A" fault. Because of poor data-resolution, there is some question whether the Huntington "A" fault reaches the seafloor. No copies of this report were located, but detailed summaries of the study are given in the reports by Neel (67-11) and Herron (July 28, 1967), both of which are found in Appendix F of Bechtel f s (67-2) detailed report.
67-15 Department of Water and Power, City of Los Angeles, August 1967, Preliminary safety analysis report, Bolsa Island Nuclear Power and Desalting Plant.
Preliminary report submitted in conjunction with Southern California Edison and San Diego Gas and Electric Co. to support the application for construction permit for the Bolsa Island Nuclear Power and Desalting Plant. The geologic and seismologic data are contained in part B of Volume I, Section 2 (Site and Environment) with subsections 2.3 (Geology and Seismicity) and 2.8 (Criteria).
Faults considered in the seismic design include the San Andreas and San Jacinto about 50 miles away, the Newport-Inglewood fault zone 1 mile to the northeast, and those of the Palos Verdes zone 7 miles to the southwest. The NIFZ has offset upper Pleistocene strata but not Recent deposits. Geophysical and site drilling studies indicate no "young," near-surface, en echelon or branching faults either immediately surrounding or under the proposed island site. The seismic design criteria considered a M 6.5 earthquake originating in the site vicinity and a M 8.0 earthquake on the San Andreas or San Jacinto to be highly probable within the next fifty years.
Figure 2.3-5 is a geologic map with accompanying eight cross-sections.
42

Smoothed response spectra were developed and normalized to O.SOg ground acceleration for the Operating Basis Earthquake (QBE) and 0.45g for the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE).
43

SAN ONOFRE NUCLEAR GENERATING STATION

IIB'OO1

34*00'

IOW

(SAN BERNARD!NO) 2 IW IE

II6°00'

SAN ONOFRE NUCLEAR ENERATING STATION
70-2.4.71-2.3.4.72-2.3. 5.6.7.8.10.73-1.74-1.2. 3.4.75-6.76-1.2.77-5. 6. 78-5. 79-2.4. 80-4.6

33*00' 118*00'

(SAN DIEGO) 0 8 16 Miles

Fig. 5 - Areas covered by geologic studies for San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station on Santa Ana sheet. See Fig. 1 for location.

II6°OO'

70-1 70-2 70-3 70-4 71-1 71-2 71-3 71-4 72-1 72-2 72-3 72-4 72-5 72-6 72-7 72-8 72-9
72-10 73-1 74-1 74-2 74-3 74-4 75-1 75-2 75-3 75-4

SANTA ANA, San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station

Converse, Davis & Assoc., 1970

75-5

Dames & Moore, 1970

75-6

Marine Advisers, 1970

76-1

Southern California Edison, 1970

76-2

Converse, Davis & Assoc., 1971

77-1

Southern California Edison, 1971a

77-2

Southern California Edison, 1971b

77-3

Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1971

77-4

Fugro, 1972

77-5

NOAA, 1972

77-6

U.S. Atomic Energy Comm., 1972

77-7

Western Geophysical, 1972

77-8

Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1972a

78-1

Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1972b

78-2

Southern California Edison, 1972

78-3

United States Geological Survey, 1972

78-4

California Division of Mines and Geology, 78-5

1972 Wilson, 1972 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1973

79-1 79-2 79-3

Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974a

79-4

Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974b

80-1

Fugro, 1974a Fugro, 1974b Fugro, 1975a Fugro, 1975b Fugro, 1975c

80-2 80-3 80-4 ooun j^ 80-6

Fugro, 1975d

West, 1975 Biehler, 1975 Fugro, 1976 Southern California Edison, 1976 Anderson, Warren & Assoc., 1977 Ehlig, 1977 Fugro, 1977a Pickard, Lowe & Garrick, 1977 Southern California Edison, 1977a Southern California Edison, 1977b Fugro, 1977b Shlemon & Assoc., Inc., 1977 Fugro, 1978 Shlemon & Assoc., Inc., 1978a Shlemon & Assoc., Inc., 1978b Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1978a Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1978b
West, 1979 Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1979 Shlemon & Assoc., Inc., 1979 Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1979b
Menard, 1980 Morris, 1980 Slemmons, 1980 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Comm., 1980
Greene & Kennedy, 1980 Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1980

SAN ONOFRE NUCLEAR GENERATING STATION (Fig. 5)
70-1 Converse, Davis and Associates, 1970, Geologic report on the probability of ground displacement of faults in the vicinity of the San Onofre Nuclear Power Plant Site, Units 2 & 3, San Diego, California: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2A, 26 p. (70-4)
Preliminary fault evaluation for Units 2 and 3 at SONGS, drawn on existing data from the SONGS Unit 1 studies and other published and unpublished data supplemented by detailed geologic mapping and logging of excavations across the Cristianitos fault in: Piano Trabuco, the San Onofre Bluffs, and the seacliffs between SONGS and the Cristianitos fault. A detailed geologic map of the Cristianitos fault from San Mateo Canyon to the shoreline is included.
The report concludes that no faults could be found in the foundation rocks for the SONGS Units 2 and 3 site (San Mateo Formation) nor projected into the site, and that the Cristianitos fault has not displaced the ground surface for at least 80,000 years with no known historic seismicity.
70-2 Dames and Moore, Inc., 1970, Seismic and foundation studies for proposed Units 2 & 3, SONGS: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2B, 68 p. (70-4)
Foundation engineering and seismicity report for Units 2 and 3 of SONGS, including soil classification and analysis, foundation design criteria, and stability analyses. The seismicity section includes: (1) discussion of site dynamic-foundation characteristics; (2) table of historic earthquakes (Table IA), and major earthquakes of M 6.0 or greater (Table IB) that affected the SONGS area; (3) list of nearby earthquakes greater than VI on the Modified Mercalli Scale; (4) earthquake recurrence curves (Plates S-8A & S-8B); (5) SONGS Units 2 and 3 design earthquake characteristics (Table II) and site response spectra (Table III); and (6) discussion of the major fault zones around SONGS (Whittier-Elsinore fault zone, San Andreas fault zone, Newport-Inglewood fault zone, Offshore fault zone). Data used for the seismic hazard analysis were taken from existing literature. No field investigations of faults were undertaken.
This study concludes that an Operating Basis Earthquake (QBE) of 0.25g horizontal acceleration and a Design Basis Earthquake (DBE) of 0.40g horizontal acceleration are acceptable for SONGS Units 2 and 3.
70-3 Marine Advisers, Inc., April 24, 1970, Continuous seismic profiling investigations of the continental shelf off San Onofre, California: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2B, 28 p. (70-4)
Report of a continuous seismic profiling survey conducted offshore from SONGS using four systems: (1) Sparker; (2) High-Resolution Boomer; (3) 7-kHz High-Resolution Profiler; and (4) Side-Scan Sonar. The study investigated the offshore extensions of the Cristianitos and NewportInglewood fault zones (NIFZ) and mapped the geologic structure of the continental shelf and slope.
48

The report concludes: (1) no offshore faults project toward or through SONGS; (2) seaward from SONGS two faults cut a generally westdipping homoclinal structure, with a minor fault "E" located 1 mile offshore and a major fault "A" located 5 miles offshore; (3) a possible branch of the NIFZ was detected offshore from Newport Beach, but its relation to fault "A" is unresolved; and (4) offshore the Cristianitos fault turns southeast and does not intersect fault "A" in the area studied. Figures include location of survey lines (Figs. 1-3), a structural contour map (Fig. 4), samples of seismic profiles (Figs. 5-8, 10 and 11), and the possible correlation between NIFZ and fault "A" (Fig. 9).
70-4 Southern California Edison Company and San Diego Gas and Electric Company, 1970, Preliminary Safety Analysis Report (PSAR) for San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS), Units 2 and 3, 6 volumes.
Preliminary report submitted to the Atomic Energy Commission in support of the application for a construction permit for SONGS Units 2 and 3. This report has 21 amendments containing corrections, additions, and consultants' reports. Geologic and seismologic data are contained in Volume II, Section 2 ("Site and Environment") with Subsection 2.9 ("Geology") and 2.10 ("Seismology"). Subsection 2.9 is a brief summary of the general geologic setting for SONGS and refers to Appendices 2A and 2B for reports by Converse, Davis and Associates (70-1), and by Marine Advisers, Inc. (703) for details on surrounding onshore and offshore geology, respectively. Subsection 2.10 is a brief summary of site seismology and refers to Appendix 2B for a report by Dames and Moore (70-2) for details on the development of the seismic design criteria.
Faults considered in the seismic design included the Elsinore, San Jacinto, San Andreas, Newport-Inglewood, Cristianitos, and three unnamed offshore faults. The seismic evaluation concluded that an earthquake on the San Andreas, San Jacinto, or the offshore fault "A" was the most likely to affect SONGS. Smoothed response spectra were developed and normalized to 0.25g for the Operating Basis Earthquake (QBE) and to 0.50g for the Design Basis Earthquake (DBE).
Appendices and amendments to the PSAR containing additional geotechnical data and consultants' reports are as follows:
Appendix 2A: Converse, Davis and Associates, 1970, Geologic report on the probability of ground displacement of faults in the vicinity of the San Onofre Nuclear Power Plant Site, Units 2 & 3, San Diego, California. (70-1)
Appendix 2B: Marine Advisers, Inc., April 24, 1970, Continuous seismic profiling investigations of the continental shelf off San Onofre, California. (70-3)
Appendix 2C: Board of Technical Review, January 29, 1971a, Geologic structure of the continental shelf off San Onofre: Regional relationships and influence on seismicity. (71-2)
49

Appendix 2D: Southern California Edison Co., 1971, Responses to Atomic Energy Commission questions concerning seismology and geology at SONGS. (71-3)
Attachment 1: Effects on recorded data of being relatively near the rupture trace.
Attachment 2: Discussion of confirmation provided for San Onofre analytical model by San Fernando Earthquake results.
Appendix 2E: Southern California Edison Co., April 1, 1972, San Onofre site geology and seismicity, overall summary.
Attachment 1: Western Geophysical Company of America, March 7, 1972, Final report: San Onofre offshore investigations. (72-4)
Attachment 2: Woodward-McNeill and Associates, April 5, 1972, Estimates of site dynamic response, SONGS, Units 2 & 3. (72-6)
Attachment 3: Woodward-McNeill and Associates, March 13, 1972, Material properties studies, SONGS. (72-5)
Attachment 4: Fugro, Inc., April 6, 1972, Report of geologic and fault reconnaissance, vicinity of Oceanside, California. (72-1)
Appendix 2F: California Division of Mines and Geology, 1972, Report on the geologic investigation of the west branch of the Cristianitos fault in the Arroyo Trabuco area. (72-9)
Appendix 2G: Wilson, B.W., December 1972, Estimates of tsunami effect at San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 & 3, California. (72-10)
Appendix 2H: Woodward-McNeill and Associates, March 27, 1973, Evaluation of the stability of proposed 2:1 switchyard slopes and 1/2:1 slopes, SONGS, Units 2 & 3. (73-1)
Amendment No. 1 to Preliminary Safety Analysis Report for San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 and 3, Southern California Edison Company and San Diego Gas and Electric Company (PSAR - SONGS), August 31, 1970.
I. Additional information concerning geology and seismology:
50

1. Comparison of the geologic investigation of the San Onofre site with that required for surface faulting by the AEC tentative geologic and seismic siting criteria (included in subsection 1.8).
2. Comparison of the geologic and seismological conditions at San Onofre and Bolsa Island sites (included in subsection 1.8).
3. Additional data concerning age dating used in the study of the Cristianitos fault (additional data supporting conclusions of Appendix 2A, PSAR (included in subsection 2.9).
II. Appendix 2B replaced in entirety by:
1. Dames and Moore, April 15, 1970, Seismic and foundation studies, proposed Units 2 and 3, San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, San Onofre, California. (70-2)
2. Marine Advisers, Inc., April 24, 1970, Continuous seismic profiling investigation of the continental shelf off San Onofre, California. (70-3)
III. Subsections and figures amended in Geology (2.9) and Seismicity (2.10) sections: 2.9.5, Areal Subsidence; Figure 2.9-2, Plot Plan & Geologic Map; 2.10.5, Site Seismic Evaluation; Figure 2.10-2, Smoothed Response Spectra. Other changes occur in: 2.5.1, Grading; 2.7, Hydrology; Appendix 2A, pp. 3, 6, 7 & 22; all of Appendix 2B.
Amendment No. 3, PSAR - SONGS, November 23, 1970
I. Response to specific items of interest: these items are of such a nature that it is not practical to include them in the text of the PSAR. Items of interest to geology and seismology are listed under Section 2, Site and Environment; questions include:
1. 28 ft tsunami discussion 2. Areas of offshore oil-withdrawal subsidence 3. Data on "areal subsidence" (PSAR 2.9.5) 4. Coastal terraces, stratigraphic position and minimum
age (PSAR 2.9.4) 5. Summary of Dr. Leonard Palmer's dissertation on marine-
terrace sequence and continuity (PSAR 2.9.4) 6. Additional data on Cristianitos fault (PSAR 2.9.4) 7. Offshore structures between faults "D" and "E" dis-
cussed further. 8. Additional discussion on Cristianitos fault geomorphic
characteristics.
51

II. Sections replaced in Geology (2.9) and Seismicity (2.10) sections: 2.9.A, Structures; 2.9.5, Areal Subsidence; 2.9.6, Foundations; 2.9.7, Excavated Slopes; 2.10.5, Site Seismic Evaluation; 2.10.6, Installation of Strong Motion Earthquake Recording System.
Amendment No. 10, PSAR - SONGS, June 16, 1971
I. Response to specific items of interest; questions include:
1. 28 ft tsunami discussion 2. Cristianitos fault geomorphic features 3. Extension of fault "A" of Marine Advisers report (70-3)
II. Subsections and figures amended in Geology (2.9) and Seismicity (2.10) sections: 2.9.1, General; 2.9.2, Physiography; 2.9.5, Areal Subsidence; 2.9.7, Excavated Slopes; 2.10.2, Seismic Investigation; 2.10.4.3, Offshore Faults; 2.10.5, Site Seismic Evaluation; 2.10.6, Installation of Strong Motion Earthquake Recording System.
III. Appendix 2D - Responses to AEC questions concerning seismicity and geology. Discusses the offshore geology at the San Onofre site and includes calculations for site accelerations for a M 7 and larger event.
Amendment No. 11, PSAR - SONGS, April 1, 1972
I. Response to specific items of interest; questions include:
1. Comparison of geologic investigations with AEC siting criteria.
2. Additional data supporting offshore trend of Cristianitos fault.
3. Additional data for structures between faults "D" and "E" offshore.
A. Additional data for analysis of structures relating to Cristianitos fault.
5. Data to support seaward extension and seismic potential of the Pelican Hills fault.
6. Additional seismic design basis for Operating Basis Earthquake (QBE) and Design Basis Earthquake (DBE) response in Appendix 2E.
7. Discussion of displacement on Cristianitos fault near San Onofre.
II. Subsections and figures amended in Geology (2.9) and Seismicity (2.10) sections: 2.9.1, General; 2.9.2, Physiography; 2.9.A, Structures; 2.10.2, Seismic Investigations; 2.10.5, Site Seismic Evaluations.
52

III. Changes in or additions to appendices:
Appendix 2E added: "San Onofre Site geology and seismology" includes three additional consultants' reports:
Attachment 1: Western Geophysical Company of America, March 7, 1972, San Onofre offshore investigation. (72-4)
Attachment 2: Woodward-McNeill and Associates, April 5, 1972, Estimates of site dynamic response, San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 & 3. (72-6)
Attachment 3: Woodward-McNeill and Associates, March 13, 1972, Material property studies, San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station. (72-5)
Amendment No. 12, PSAR - SONGS, April 18, 1972
I. Appendix 2E, Attachment 4: Fugro, Inc., April 6, 1972, Report of geologic and fault reconnaissance, vicinity of Oceanside, California. (72-1)
II. Subsection and figure amended in Seismicity section (2.10): 2.10.6, Installation of Strong Motion Earthquake Recording System; Appendix 2E.
Amendment No. 13, PSAR - SONGS, May 15, 1972
Response to specific items of interest; questions include:
1. Expanded discussion on seismic design. 2. Comparison of site response spectra. 3. Comparison of geologic data with Western Geophysical's
offshore data for Cristianitos fault. 4. Relationship between Cristianitos and South Coast
Offshore fault. 5. Evidence supporting lack of activity on the Cristianitos
fault. 6. Major offshore faults. 7. San Joaquin structural high. 8. South Coast Offshore fault and Rose Canyon fault compared.
Amendment No. 16, PSAR - SONGS, October 12, 1972
I. Discussion on slope stability analysis.
II. Discussion on study of the effects of a tsunami generated nearby from an offshore earthquake.
III. Design spectra for various values of damping and design basis acceleration time history.
53

IV. Appendix 2F: California Division of Mines and Geology, 1972, Report on the geologic investigation of the west branch of the Cristianitos fault in the Arroyo Trabuco area. (72-9)
Amendment 17, PSAR - SONGS, April 18, 1973
I. Appendix 2G: Wilson, B.W., December 1972, Estimate of tsunami effects at San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 & 3, California. (72-10)
II. Appendix 2H: Woodward-McNeill and Associates, March 27, 1973, Stability of proposed slopes for the proposed Units 2 & 3, San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, San Onofre, California. (73-1)
71-1 Converse, Davis and Associates, June 4, 1971, Preliminary Geologic Report of the Coastal Central Portion of Camp Pendleton Marine Base, San Diego County, California, for City of Los Angeles, Department of Water and Power, 20 p. (71-1)
Siting study of 9 miles of seacliffs and adjacent inland areas from SONGS southeast to Aliso Canyon to examine the geologic conditions along the coast east of the Cristianitos fault. Five locations of terrace offsets are noted, but the report concludes that they are of nontectonic origin. The two appendices contain foraminiferal correlations of the bedrock.
71-2 Southern California Edison Company, Board of Technical Review, January 29, 1971a, Geologic structure of the continental shelf off San Onofre: Regional relationships and influence on seismicity: in PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2C, 55 p. (70-4)
Findings of a group of consultants to SCE reviewing offshore data to evaluate the possible connection between fault "A" offshore from SONGS and the Newport-Inglewood fault zone (NIFZ). The Board concluded that: (1) structure near the edge of the continental shelf off SONGS is a gentle anticline-syncline with discontinuous faults; (2) the NIFZ dies out southeast of Laguna Beach; (3) the Cristianitos fault dies out about 10,000 feet offshore from SONGS; (4) the NIFZ is a localized zone of deformation caused by north-south compression during post-Oligocene time; Cenozoic activity dies out to the southeast with no related offshore geologic structure or seismicity south of Laguna Beach; and (5) the earthquake that could be felt by SONGS is limited by the NIFZ length (90 km) and will cause a 0.17g ground acceleration at SONGS, less than 0.25g previously estimated for a San Andreas rupture. The report contains 14 figures, mostly seismicreflection profiles and profile location maps.
54

71-3 Southern California Edison Company, 1971b, Responses to Atomic Energy Commission questions concerning seismology and geology at SONGS: in PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2D, p. 2D-1 to 2D-21. (70-4)
Report in response to AEC questions on the SONGS site geology and seismology. The report describes the offshore geology at SONGS and the basis for concluding that a major earthquake on the South Coast Offshore fault zone (SCOFZ) is not credible. Also included is a discussion of the SONGS' seismic design based on a hypothetical event on the SCOFZ. This report contains two attachments: (1) effects on recorded data of being relatively near the rupture trace; and (2) discussion of confirmation provided for San Onofre analytical model by San Fernando earthquake results.
71-4 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, October 14, 1971, Elastic and Damping Properties, Laydown Area, San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, 8 p., 8 appendices.
Report giving the elastic and damping parameters of the SONGS area for the proposed expansion of Units 2 and 3. The data include modulus values from both field and laboratory measurements, hysteretic damping values, spatial damping values, spring constants, and various physical and mechanical properties of the soil and rock. The report includes eight appendices containing backup data for the conclusions.
72-1 Fugro, Inc., April 6, 1972, Report of geologic and fault reconnaissance, vicinity of Oceanside, California: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2E, Attachment 4, 8 p. (70-4)
Reconnaissance study using air-photo interpretation, previous geologic studies, and selected geologic field observations of 120 square miles including the City of Oceanside and Camp Pendleton Marine Base to identify major faults.
The report concludes that two roughly-parallel, north-northeast-striking high-angle faults trend from Camp De Luz (on Camp Pendleton) to the City of Oceanside. Observations at ten locations indicate these faults cut preTertiary to middle Miocene rock and possibly Holocene marine and river terraces. Six plates show selected outcrop photos taken at the locations along the faults.
72-2 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 1972, Report on the site seismicity for the SONGS, Units 2 and 3, Seismological Investigations Group of the Earth Sciences Laboratories: in U.S. AEC Safety Evaluation of the SONGS Units 2 and 3, 1972, Appendix D, p. Dl to D7. (72-3)
Review of the SONGS PSAR (70-4) and the USGS (72-8) report. Concludes that the South Coast Offshore fault zone is the most critical fault for the
55

SONGS design and recommends that a 0.67g acceleration from an Intensity X (Modified Mercalli Scale) event within a few miles of the SONGS site be used for design.
72-3 United States Atomic Energy Commission, 1972, Safety Evaluation of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station Units No. 2 and 3, Docket Nos. 50-361 and 50-362, 112 p.
Report on the effects of a variety of man-made and natural hazards likely to occur at SONGS. Based upon its own consultants' studies, the AEC considers the South Coast Offshore Zone of Deformation to be continuous with the Newjiort-Inglewood fault zone and the Rose Canyon fault, giving a total length of deformation of 240 km. The AEC therefore recommends that an acceleration of 0.67g can be expected to affect SONGS from a maximum Intensity X (Modified Mercalli Scale) earthquake. The AEC indicates that the revision by Southern California Edison Company of the Design Basis Earthquake to 0.67g and the Operating Basis Earthquake to 0.33g is acceptable.
Two AEC-consultant reports used for seismic hazard evaluation are included in the appendices (see Appendix C, U.S. Geological Survey, 72-8 and Appendix D, NOAA, 72-2).
72-4 Western Geophysical Company of America, March 7, 1972, Final report: San Onofre offshore investigation: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2E, Attachment 1, 43 p. (70-4)
Geophysical surveys were conducted to provide a detailed picture of the subsurface structure down to acoustic basement in an area extending from Long Beach to Rose Canyon and westward to a line about 30 miles offshore from SONGS. The study includes interpretation of 1,000 line-miles of seismic-reflection and -refraction data, 450 line-miles of seaborne magnetometer data, and analysis of existing gravity data. The results are presented in a series of structural contour maps, fault anomaly maps, and annotated seismic profiles.
The report concludes that the Newport-Inglewood fault zone offsets upper Miocene strata and terminates offshore and southeast of Newport Beach against the San Joaquin Hills anticlinal high. The South Coast Offshore fault is closest to SONGS, strikes northwest-southeast and is approximately 5 miles from shore. This fault does not appear to connect with the Newport-Inglewood fault zone to the northwest or with the Rose Canyon fault to the southeast. The South Coast Offshore fault, about 40 miles long, has vertical and possibly right-lateral displacement. Displacement dies out in the uppermost Miocene-Pliocene strata.
72-5 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, March 13, 1972a, Material properties studies, SONGS: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2E, Attachment 3, 5 p. (70-4)
Foundation engineering study presenting the results of the measurement of the elastic and damping parameters of the soils at SONGS. Data collect-
56

ed from both field and laboratory measurements are presented. Appendices A to H present details on the investigation and include a report on seismic velocities by Weston Geophysical Engineering, Inc. (Appendix C).
72-6 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, April 5, 1972b, Estimates of site dynamic response, SONGS, Units 2 & 3: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2E, Attachment 2. (70-4)
Engineering report presenting soil/rock dynamic characteristics at SONGS and estimates of site response to earthquakes from hypothesized movement on postulated causative faults. Calculations are based on maximum accelerations of 0.12g and 0.5g, using a family of earthquakes with a broad range of earthquake characteristics, from several causative faults (San Andreas, San Jacinto, Elsinore, and Newport-Inglewood).
72-7 Southern California Edison Company, April 1, 1972, San Onofre site geology and seismology, overall summary: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2E, p. 2E-1 to 2E-23. (70-4)
Report updating the seismic design basis for SONGS Units 2 and 3, based on additional studies conducted since the original PSAR publication; these additional studies can be found in Appendices 2.5A to 2.5D of the PSAR for SONGS (70-4). Contains a detailed discussion of the South Coast Offshore fault zone (SCOFZ), the Rose Canyon fault, and the San Joaquin Hills structural high. Also included are discussions of seismic design criteria, including fault activity, site acceleration, Design Basis Earthquake (DBE), Operating Basis Earthquake (QBE), and site dynamic response. These topics are supported by three consultants' reports in the appendices.
The report concludes that although investigations of the SCOFZ indicate a low potential for rupture, Southern California Edison Company has hypothesized such an event and used it to determine the resultant site acceleration of SONGS. The resultant DBE site acceleration is 0.5g and the QBE is 0.25g.
72-8 United States Geological Survey, 1972, Review of relevant geology for San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS); in U.S. Atomic Energy Commission Safety Evaluation for SONGS, 1972, Appendix C, p. Cl to C36. (72-3)
A concluding supplemental report reviewing the SONGS PSAR (70-4) and its amendments and appendices, with particular attention to the fault model for the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE). Parts of a previous review report given to the AEC on July 2, 1971 are included in this appendix, but the details are not repeated. This report disagrees with the PSAR and the report by Western Geophysical Company (72-4) on the length and activity of the South Coast Offshore Zone of Deformation, and concludes that the SCOZD has been intermittently active since the middle Miocene, is a potentiallyactive continuous zone of deformation approximately 240 km long, and is located 5 miles from SONGS. This zone is recommended to be used for the SONGS SSE.
57

72-9 California Division of Mines and Geology, 1972, Report on the geologic investigation of the west branch of the Cristianitos fault in the Arroyo Trabuco area: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2F, 7 p. (70-4)
Report of a detailed geologic study on the Cristianitos fault, including a backhoe excavation to investigate possible evidence of Holocene displacement. The study concludes that suggestions of recent fault movement at the excavation area may be due to landsliding or rock creep. No evidence for Holocene faulting on the Cristianitos fault was found.
72-10 Wilson, B.W., December 1972, Estimates of tsunami effect at San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 and 3, California: in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2G, 83 p. (70-4)
The possible effects of a tsunami generated by a hypothetical M 7.5 earthquake 5 miles offshore from SONGS were evaluated, assuming a horizontal strike-slip displacement of 7.5 meters and a vertical displacement of 2.2 meters. Maximum run-up and draw-down predicted from a M 7.5 earthquake is 4.8 meters (at high tide) and 2.8 meters (at low tide).
73-1 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, March 27, 1973, Evaluation of the stability of proposed 2:1 switchyard slopes and 1/2:1 slopes, SONGS, Units 2 & 3,in the PSAR for SONGS, Appendix 2H, 96 p. (70-4)
Soil engineering report evaluating the static and dynamic slope stability of proposed slopes at SONGS. The report contains ten figures and seven appendices.
74-1 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, I974a, Analyses of Properties of Finer-grained San Mateo Sand, SONGS Units 2 & 3, San Onofre, California, 6 p.
Tests and analyses made for this study indicate the more fine-grained San Mateo Sand has static and dynamic strength of the same magnitude as previously determined for the more coarse-grained San Mateo Sand. Laboratory tests performed included static and dynamic triaxial tests, compaction tests, grain-size distribution tests and specific gravity tests.
74-2 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, December 19, 1974b, Offshore Liquefaction Evaluation for the Proposed Units 2 and 3, SONGS, San Onfore, California, 10 p.
Engineering report on the liquefaction potential of the San Mateo Sand which will underlie the proposed cooling-water intake and outtake system offshore from SONGS. The report presents dynamic strength characteristics of the San Mateo Sand, a finite element analysis using the SONGS Design
58

Basis Earthquake (DBE) and an analytical factor of safety against liquefaction. The reader is referred to Woodward-McNeill (73-1) on slope stability for SONGS Units 2 and 3 for DBE data.
74-3 Fugro, Inc., July 5, 1974a, Analysis of Geologic Features Revealed during Grading at San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 and 3, 32 p. and appendices.
Presents observations and conclusions about planar features revealed in foundation excavations during grading of SONGS Units 2 and 3. Discussed in this report are features in the San Mateo Formation which are discontinuous, conjugate, joint-like shears (named "A" features and "B" features according to orientation). They are postulated to have resulted from northwest-southeast regional compressional stresses. The features do not displace the overlying marine terrace platform and are therefore older than 70,000 - 130,000 years. Based on this investigation the features are not considered capable faults in terms of AEC criteria.
74-4 Fugro, Inc., November 1, 1974b, Analysis of C and D Type Features at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Stations, 19 p. and appendices.
Presents observations and conclusions on geologic features revealed during the excavation of SONGS, Units 2 and 3, at a lower elevation than previous Type A and B features (74-3). The report concludes that the Type C features are short and diffuse, are entirely within the San Mateo Formation, and except for attitude are similar to Type A and B features. The Type D features are not continuous across the site, displace A and B features, do not displace the 70,000 to 130,000 year old marine terrace platform and their formation is consistent with the stress system that produced the Type A and B features. These features are not considered capable faults in terms of AEC criteria.
75-1 Fugro, Inc., September 12, 1975a, Summary of geomorphic and age data for the first emergent terrace (Qtj) at SONGS: in Southern California Edison Co., 1976, Recent Geotechnical Studies, Southern Orange County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2 & 3, Volume I, Enclosure 1, Appendix C, 52 p. (76-2)
Detailed geologic study of the Sangamon or first emergent terrace (Qt,) at SONGS and its correlation with other Sangamon-age terrace from San Diego to Monterey, California (Fig. 3). A description is given of the Qt^ terrace at SONGS, along with a summary of early-to-late Pleistocene geomorphic history of the SONGS area and diagrammatic cross sections. The lack of displacement of the basal Sangamon-age terrace gravel, which overlies the Cristianitos fault, is given as evidence of no movement on the Cristianitos fault for at least the last 120,000 years. The methods and reliability of uranium-series age determinations, and a listing of all age dates used for the Sangamon-age terrace correlation, are also discussed.
59

75-2 Fugro, Inc., September 15, 1975b, Geomorphic analysis of terraces in San Juan and Bell Canyons, Orange County, California: in Southern California Edison Co., 1976, Recent Geotechnical Studies, Southern Orange County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2 & 3, Volume I, Enclosure 2, 21 p. (76-2)
Detailed geomorphic study of the stream and marine terraces of San Juan and Bell Canyons and of the Dana Point area to determine the ages of Quaternary stream deposits, and to demonstrate whether they are deformed across the Cristianitos fault. The terraces were mapped at a scale of 1 inch - 2,000 feet using map elevations and precise barometric altimeter measurements to obtain an overall accuracy of +_ 2 feet in elevation. Stream-terrace profiles of the canyons indicate no warping, tilting or offset across the Cristianitos fault. The two lowest stream terraces in the canyons are correlated with marine terraces estimated to be 120,000 to 200,000 years old. The study concludes that no movement has occurred on the Cristianitos fault for at least 120,000 years.
75-3 Fugro, Inc., November 1, 1975c, Geologic investigation of the bulldozer excavation at the proposed Viejo Substation site: in Southern California Edison Co., 1976, Recent Geotechnical Studies, Southern Orange County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2 & 3, Volume I, Enclosure 1, Appendix A, 2 p. (76-2)
Letter describing an investigation of the Cristianitos fault exposed in a bulldozer trench within a proposed electrical substation site. The trench was logged at a scale of 1 inch = 5 feet, with details at 1 inch = 2 feet. Four traces of the Cristianitos fault are exposed and have an average strike of N3°W. The largest fault juxtaposes Puente Formation against Capistrano Formation with displacement probably down on the west. A Pleistocene fluvial terrace deposit overlies the fault traces without displacement .
75-4 Fugro, Inc., November 14, 1975d, Geologic investigation of the Mission Viejo (F. Beach Leighton) bulldozer excavation: in Southern California Edison Co., 1976, Recent Geotechnical Studies, Southern Orange County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2 & 3, Volume I, Enclosure 1, Appendix B, 3p. (76-2)
Letter summarizing findings from excavation of bulldozer and backhoe trenches to clarify and augment earlier findings of an investigation for a residential development across the Cristianitos fault. The trenches were logged at a scale of 1 inch » 2 feet and contained two vertical shears trending N5°W and displaying evidence of vertical slip. A previously described lime-filled crack does not relate to fault traces of the Cristianitos fault, but instead lies 8 to 12 feet southwest of the fault. Other lime-filled cracks in the overlying soil are related to the shrinkswell characteristics of the soil rather than to fault displacements. No evidence for Holocene movement on the Cristianitos fault was found.
60

75-5 West, J.C., November 1975, Generalized subsurface and geophysical study, Capistrano area, Orange County, California, for SONGS Units 2 and 3: in Southern California Edison Co., 1976, Recent Geotechnical Studies, Southern Orange County, California, Volume II, Enclosure 3. (76-2)
Report of an investigation of a 350 square-mile area in the Cristianitos Embayment adjacent to the Cristianitos fault and between the San Joaquin Hills and the Santa Ana Mountains to aid in the understanding of recent seismic activity of the area. Five subsurface contour maps and geologic structure sections were prepared using seismic-reflection profiles, gravity (820 stations), aeromagnetic (2,100 line miles), and welllog (118 wells) data. This report concludes that the Cristianitos fault is a normal fault with down-to-the-west vertical separation of between 1,700 to 4,000 feet in the central onshore portion. No significant movement appears to have occurred since late Pliocene time.
75-6 Biehler, S., November 1975, Seismological investigations of the San Juan Capistrano area, Orange County, California, for SONGS Units 2 & 3: in Southern California Edison Co., 1976, Recent Geotechnical Studies, Southern Orange County, California, Volume II, Enclosure 4, (76-2)
Evaluates the relationship between the central part of the Cristianitos fault and two earthquakes (M 3.8 and 3.3) that occurred on January 3, 1975, near San Juan Capistrano. The study included re-analysis of the original Caltech seismological data, establishment of a portable seismograph network (6 units) to monitor microseismicity, detonation of two calibration shots to develop a more accurate crustal model, review of historic seismicity, and analysis of oil company seismic-reflection data.
Conclusions of the report are: (1) the two earthquakes cannot be located on the Cristianitos fault; (2) the focal mechanisms indicate motion in the thrust-left-slip direction, opposite the geohistoric Cristianitos fault movement; (3) the earthquakes are associated with a northwestdipping, northeast-trending fault, oblique to the Cristianitos fault; (4) microseismicity is very low for the Cristianitos fault; most of the activity recorded by the microseismic network is associated with the Elsinore fault. The author speculates that the January 3, 1975, earthquakes occurred from settlement within the Capistrano embayment.
The report contains 24 figures, 17 tables, and two appendices (8 figures, 6 tables). Most of the tables and figures deal with data from the main seismic events. Figure 23 is an aeromagnetic contour map of the Santa Barbara - San Pedro Channel (scale 1 inch =1.5 miles; contour interval = 10 gammas). Figure 24 is a Bouguer gravity map of the Capistrano Embayment (scale 1 inch « 0.65 miles; contour level « 1 milligal).
76-1 Fugro, Inc., August 1976, Final report on geologic features at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 and 3: Consultants' report for Southern California Edison Co., 24 p.
Summarizes observations and conclusions on shears and other features
61

in the San Mateo Formation found during the excavation of the SONGS Units 2 and 3 Containment Building foundations previously reported in Fugro (74-3, 74-4). The report concludes that offsets (Features A through D) are jointlike conjugate shears and are older than 120,000 years because they do not offset the first emergent marine terrace. A model is presented which reasons that the features were caused by north-south compression. Five drawings showing the SONGS Unit 2 and 3 excavations, profiles, and regional stress patterns are given. Appendix A gives five detailed photos and graphic logs of the geologic features.
76-2 Southern California Edison Company, 1976, Recent Geotechnical Studies, Southern Orange County, California, for SONGS Units 2 & 3, Volumes I & II.
This report includes six reports by consultants for SONGS indexed as follows:
Volume I:
Enclosure 1: Appendix A, Fugro, Inc., November 1, 1975c (75-3) Appendix B, Fugro, Inc., November 14, 1975d (75-4) Appendix C, Fugro, Inc., September 12, 1975a (75-1)
Enclosure 2: Fugro, Inc., September 15, 1975b (75-2)
Volume II:
Enclosure 3: West, J.C., November 1975 (75-5)
Enclosure 4: Biehler, S., 1975 (75-6)
For the annotations for these reports, refer to listing by author.
77-1 Anderson, Warren, and Associates, 1977, Results of microfossil identification and geologic age correlation, vicinity of SONGS, California: in Southern California Edison Co., 1977, Geotechnical Studies, Northern San Diego County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2, & 3, Appendix A, Enclosure 3, 36 p. (77-6)
A sequence of letters identifying fossils from localities in Ehlig (77-2). Of interest is a Pacific Coast and Indo-Pacific regional correlation chart of calcareous and siliceous microplankton compiled by the consultants.
77-2 Ehlig, P.L., September 13, 1977, Geologic report on the area adjacent to the SONGS, northwestern San Diego County, California: in Southern California Edison Co., 1977, Geotechnical Studies, Northern San Diego County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2, & 3, Enclosure 3, 40 p.
62

Geologic description of 60 square kilometers surrounding SONGS, from San Mateo Canyon southeastward to Las Pulgas Canyon, and inland from the shoreline to the eastern side of the San Onofre Mountains; includes a detailed geologic map of the coastal area surrounding SONGS. The investigation emphasized evidence bearing on the tectonic stability of the area, and the stability of the southern end of the Cristianitos embayment and its related faults.
The report concludes that: (1) the coastal area has been tectonically stable since late Pliocene, based on an undeformed marine terrace sequence and a continuous tuff unit near Horno Canyon; (2) the Cristianitos fault is the only major fault in the area, having 900 feet of down-on-west normal movement, the latest movement on which was before the formation of the lowest marine terrace (120,000 y. B.P.); and (3) four faults (the most notable is fault "E") mapped on the northwest flank of the San Onofre Mountains, east of the Cristianitos fault, are minor and show no evidence of Quaternary displacement.
The report includes three large map plates (scale 1 inch « 500 feet), seven cross-sections, a list of fossils (Table 1) and their locations (Fig. 3), and a stratigraphic column of the SONGS vicinity (Fig. 10). Appendix A is a fossil identification report prepared by Anderson, Warren, and Associates (77-1).
77-3 Fugro, Inc., October 15, 1977a, Report of geologic investigations, Trail Six (Area 1) and Horno Canyon (Area 2) landslides southeast of SONGS: in Southern California Edison Co., 1977, Geotechnical Studies, Northern San Diego County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2, & 3, Enclosure 1, 31 p. (77-6)
Two coastal areas were investigated south of SONGS where extensive landsliding and offsetting of the 120,000 years old bedrock/terrace contact has occurred. In the Trail Six area offset of the contact does not extend beyond the landslide mass and is not coincident with other evidence of faults, thus indicating a nontectonic origin for the fractures. In the Horno Canyon area multiple episodes of landsliding have occurred, and the graben feature observed there is confined to an ancient landslide mass, likewise indicating that the displacement of the bedrock/terrace contact is not of tectonic origin. Numerous large and small scale maps, terrace profiles, and geologic cross-sections accompany the report.
77-4 Pickard, Lowe, and Garrick, Inc., April 1977, Nuclear Power Plant Siting, Camp Pendleton Marine Corps Base, for San Diego Gas and Electric Co., 124 p.
Preliminary study to screen areas for the siting of a nuclear generating station within Camp Pendleton using existing geologic, seismologic, population and base-operations data.
Section 4 of this report, the Safety Assessment, contains a summary of the geology/seismology of Camp Pendleton and includes a generalized geologic map (Fig. 4.6, scale about 1:110,000) and a fault and photolineament map of Camp Pendleton (Fig. 4.7, scale about 1:110,000).
63

77-5 Southern California Edison Company, March 21, 1977a, Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR) for San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS), 17 volumes.
A multidiscipline report in 17 volumes, with information on geology and seismology contained in Volume 3 and Volume 4.
Volume 3 contains a subsection on basic geology and seismic information, vibratory ground motion, surface faulting, stability of subsurface materials and foundations, slope stability, and embankments and dams. Subsection 2.5.1 (Basic Geology/Seismology) contains a brief discussion of the regional and local faults affecting SONGS. A major part of the volume is contained in subsection 2.5.2 (Vibratory Ground Motion) and deals with the regional seismicity and effects. Tables list: (1) the noninstrumented earthquakes within 200 miles (Table 2.5-1) and 50 miles (Table 2.5-3) of SONGS; (2) instrumented epicenters within 200 miles (Table 2.5-2) and 50 miles (Table 2.5-4); (3) strong motion records within 200 miles (Table 2.56); and (4) geologic failures from earthquakes within 200 miles (Table 2.57). Volume 3 contains 78 figures which include: geology and fault maps, cross-sections, subsidence map, accelerograms, plots of epicenters within 50-and 200-mile radii, and soil engineering results. Volume 4 contains appendices to the geotechnical engineering reports on SONGS.
77-6 Southern California Edison Co., October 1977b, Geotechnical Studies, Northern San Diego County, California, for SONGS, Units 1, 2 & 3.
This report contains five consultants' reports for SONGS, indexed as follows:
Enclosure 1: Fugro, Inc., October 15, 1977a (77-3)
Enclosure 2: Fugro, Inc., October 15, 1977b (77-7)
Enclosure 3: Ehlig, P.L., September 13, 1977 (77-2)
Appendix A - Anderson, Warren and Associates, 1977 (77-1)
Enclosure 4: Shlemon, R.J. and Associates, 1977 (77-8)
For annotation of these reports see reference by author.
77-7 Fugro, Inc., October 15, 1977b, Geologic investigations of offsets in Target Canyon, Camp Pendleton, California: in Southern California Edison Co., 1977, Geotechnical Studies, Northern San Diego County, California, SONGS, Units 1, 2 & 3, Enclosure 2, 29 p. (77-6)
Previously reported bedrock/terrace offsets in the Target Canyon area of Camp Pendleton, 6.5 miles south of SONGS, were investigated by trenching and logging of three excavations to expose the offsets. The report indi-
64

cates that a 120,000-year-old bedrock/terrace contact is offset at seven localities within a zone measuring 1,000 feet by 2,000 feet with displacements of up to 14 inches. The evidence indicates primarily dip-slip movement along north to north-northeast striking faults.
The report concludes that several modes of tectonic or nontectonic origin may have caused the offsets, but that projection of the offset-zone would lie about 5 miles from SONGS. This location, combined with the probable small magnitude of the earthquake that might be associated with the faults, led the authors to conclude that the zone should not affect the already established seismic design criteria for SONGS Units 2 and 3.
77-8 Shlemon, R.J., and Associates, Inc., 1977, Geomorphic analysis of Fault "E," Camp Pendleton, California: in Southern California Edison Co., 1977, Geotechnical Studies, Northern San Diego County, California, for SONGS Units 1, 2 & 3, Enclosure 4, 12 p. (77-6)
Geomorphic study of fault "E" (Ehlig,77-2) in the coastal mountains and San Onofre Bluff areas southeast of SONGS. The report concludes that there is no evidence of displacement by fault "E" of the older (200,000 years) marine terraces (at elevation 350 ft) and that there is no other geomorphic evidence of young movement, i.e., spring lines, depressions, etc. Also, fault "E" does not offset the continental deposits of the San Onofre Bluffs which have a radiocarbon date greater than 37,000 years within the section. Using this age and assuming a sedimentation rate of about 1 ft/1,000 yr, the author estimates that the 100-foot-thick section of continental sediments is about 100,000 years old. The portions of the seacliff exposed indicate that the latest movement on fault "E" occurred before 25,000 - 30,000 years and very likely before 100,000 years ago. Appendix A is an age date from Geochron Labs.
78-1 Fugro, Inc., May 12, 1978, Geologic Investigation of Fault "E," Southeast of SONGS, San Onofre, California, 21 p.
Geologic investigation of the recently mapped northwest-striking fault "E" of Ehlig (77-2) located about 1-1/4 miles east of SONGS. Two trenches were excavated and logged at a scale of 1 inch « 5 feet. The report concludes that: (1) a marine terrace platform that is approximately 300,000 to 350,000 years old overlies Fault "E" and is not displaced; (2) the geomorphic, pedologic, and topographic evidence also suggests that there has been at least 300,000 years since the last movement along fault "E"; and (3) fault "E" is considered not capable according to criteria set forth by the NRC in 10 CFR 100, Appendix A.
78-2 Shlemon, R.J. and Associates, Inc., January 1978a, Late Quaternary Evolution of the Camp Pendleton - San Onofre State Beach Coastal Area, Northwestern San Diego County, California, for SONGS Units 2 & 3, 123 p.
The regional geology within several miles of SONGS was investigated to: (1) determine the Quaternary evolution of the Camp Pendleton - San
65

Onofre State Beach Coastal area, (CP-SOSB); (2) identify major coastal landforms; (3) date various Quaternary marine and nonmarine geologic units; and (4) identify and date the minimum age of last movement on any faults that may be found in the SONGS area.
The report concludes that: (1) nine distinct marine terrace deposits, at elevations from 55 feet to 1,250 feet, range in age from 125,000 to 780,000 years; (2) the alluvial fan deposit in the San Onofre Bluffs ranges from 125,000 years B.P. to the present, yielding a sedimentation rate of 10 to 25 cm/1,000 yr; (3) the coastal retreat of San Onofre Bluff is about 0.2 m/yr, similar to other central and southern California coastal areas; and (4) maximum uplift of CP-SOSB area for the last 125,000 years is about 4.2 cm/1,000 yr, indicating relative tectonic stability compared to elsewhere along coastal California.
The report contains tables listing: (1) radiocarbon age and location of continental samples in CP-SOSB area; (2) marine terrace areas and elevations in CP-SOSB area; and (3) tabulation of late Quaternary deformation rates of central and southern California coast.
78-3 Shlemon, R.J., and Associates, Inc., October 1978b, Late Quaternary Rates of Deformation, Laguna Beach - San Onofre State Beach, Orange and San Diego Counties, California, 40 p.
Late Quaternary (last 125,000 years) rates of deformation from Target Canyon to Laguna Beach, California, are estimated using the continuity and elevation of the first marine-terrace contact. Three components of deformation are evaluated: (1) regional up-to-northwest longitudinal tilt; (2) seaward tilt north of San Clemente; and (3) average uplift for the region during the last 125,000 years. The study results were compared to published rates of deformation for other southern California coastal areas, and are presented in Table 3.
The study concludes that: (1) the regional longitudinal uplift rate increases northward from 6 cm to 26 cm/1,000 yr from Target Canyon to Dana Point; (2) SONGS has a local uplift rate of 9 cm/1,000 yr and is relatively one of the most tectonically stable areas in southern California; and (3) any seaward tilt of the first emergent marine terrace between Camp Pendleton and Dana Point has been less than one degree.
78-4 Woodward-Clyde Consultants, July 14, 1978a, Geotechnical Evaluation of Potential Island and Offshore California LNG Import Terminal Sites, 106 p.
Geotechnical investigation for two island and five offshore LNG terminals to be located on and around Santa Rosa and Santa Cruz Islands, and offshore from Camp Pendleton. Generally discusses siting problems for the entire study area and provides limited site-specific geotechnical data as well as the results of a marine geophysical investigation for the five offshore sites. Figures and tables describe historic seismicity and faults around each site, but the reader is referred to a January 16, 1978, Woodward-Clyde Consultants report on the mainland LNG sites, Appendix A, for detailed summary of faulting and seismicity.
66

78-5 Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1978b. Report on the results of analyses performed on well 8 at the SONGS Units 2 and 3, San Onofre, California: Consultants' Report for Southern California Edison Co., 34 p. and appendices.
Evaluation of a subsurface cavity at dewatering well 8 and its effect on the performance of the adjacent structures in terms of foundation bearing capacity. The effects of this cavity on settlement and bearing capacity of the containment structure were found to be very small and to not affect the integrity of the structure.
79-1 West, J.C., January 1979, Supplement to the Generalized Subsurface and Geophysical Study, Capistrano Area, Orange County, California, by West, J.D., 1975, 15 p. (75-5)
Supplements West (75-5) in response to NRC question 361.35 part (e) interpreting the relationship between onshore and offshore structures in the Capistrano Einbayment. Two contour maps (top of Monterey and base of Tertiary - top of Cretaceous), six geologic structure sections, and four annotated seismic-reflection profiles are included.
The report concludes that major tectonic activity within 10 miles of SONGS took place prior to the end of Pliocene time (^2 m.y.B.P.), and the region has been tectonically quiet since that time, except for the South Coast Offshore Zone of Deformation (SCOZD), which had probable late Pleistocene movement. No late Pleistocene or younger faults were revealed within 5 miles of SONGS.
79-2 Woodward-Clyde Consultants, June 1979a, Report on the Evaluation of Maximum Earthquake and Site Ground Motion Parameters Associated with the Offshore Zone of Deformation for SONGS, 30 p.
Detailed geologic, seismologic, and earthquake engineering analyses are presented to estimate the maximum earthquake magnitude and maximum ground motion for the SONGS Design Basis Earthquake (DBE). The source of the DBE is the Offshore Zone of Deformation (OZD) about 5 miles (8 km) west of SONGS. The OZD is composed of the Newport-Inglewood Zone of Deformation (NIZD), the South Coast Offshore Zone of Deformation (SCOZD), and the Rose Canyon fault zone (RCFZ), which have a combined length of 145 miles (240 km). The DBE is estimated to be M 6-1/2, which yields a maximum ground acceleration of 0.67g at SONGS. An instrumental-mean and 84th-percentile response spectrum is developed from analysis of 56 earthquake records.
The report includes: detailed discussions of the NIZD, SCOZD, RCFZ, and the hypothesized OZD, and of worldwide strike-slip faults. The appendices include: a discussion and tabulation of data on the OZD based on geologic literature; correlation of E-logs from oil wells; seismic reflection profiles; analysis of teleseismic data from the Long Beach earthquake of 1933; a tabulation of data on displacements and slip-rates on major strike-slip faults in California and the world; a discussion of the development of peak acceleration-attenuation relationships for soil, combined soil and rock, and their applications to SONGS.
67

79-3 Shlemon, R.J. and Associates, Inc., July 1979, Late Cenozoic Stratigraphy, Capistrano Embayment, Coastal Area, Orange County, California, 27 p.
Discusses the late Cenozoic stratigraphic markers between SONGS and Dana Point. Absolute and relative ages of these markers are used to determine the age of the most recent movement on the Dana Point fault, and the subsurface Vaciadero and Carr faults. The report concludes that: (1) the 125,000-year-old Terrace 1 is tilted up to the north between SONGS and Dana Point; (2) the Dana Point fault displaces the Tertiary Capistrano Formation but not Terrace 1; (3) the Vaciadero and Carr faults do not displace either the upper Capistrano Formation or the overlying Quaternary deposits; and (4) the last faulting in the coastal portion of the Capistrano Embayment, between Dana Point and SONGS, occurred earlier than 125,000 years ago.
79-4 Woodward-Clye Consultants, 1979b, Report of the exploration/ demobilization of wells 4 and 5, SONGS Units 2 & 3: Consultant's Report for Southern California Edison Co., 27 p. and appendices.
Investigation of the areas around wells 4 and 5 to detect and delineate possible cavities caused by dewatering operations. A small cavity in well 5 was stabilized by pressure grouting. Both wells were capped and considered demobilized.
80-1 Menard, H. W., November 26, 1980, Letter from U.S. Geological Survey to NRC reviewing geologic and seismologic data for SONGS Units 2 and 3; in USNRC Safety Evaluation Report, 1980, Appendix G, p. Gl to G7. (80-4)
Letter reviewing the geologic and seismologic data for SONGS Units 2 and 3, including an addendum to a previous USGS review by Morris (80-2). This and the Morris review conclude that: (1) the USGS generally concurs with Southern California Edison Company and its consultants on the history of the Cristianitos fault and its being capped by 125,000 y.B.P. terraces; (2) the Cristianitos fault is one of several faults in an offshore zone of deformation, the Cristianitos Zone of Deformation (CZD) of Morris (80-2); and (3) there is a lack of potential for movement on the Cristianitos fault in response to displacement on the offshore zone of deformation; and (4) the Cristianitos fault is not a capable fault. This review also contains a discussion of the slip-rate versus magnitude study used for estimating the maximum earthquake in the seismic design of SONGS, Units 2 and 3. The USGS expresses an opinion that the maximum earthquake limit (MEL) line should be steeper, i.e., larger magnitude earthquakes for small slip-rates.
80-2 Morris, R.H., August 13, 1980, Letter from the USGS to the NRC reviewing offshore seismic reflection profiles in vicinity of the Cristianitos fault, San Onofre, California, a study by H.G. Green (USGS) and M.P. Kennedy (CDMG): in USNRC Safety Evaluation Report, 1980, Appendix F, p. Fl to F23. (80-4)
68

Summarizes the results of a study to determine the seaward extension and structural relationships of the Cristianitos Zone of Deformation (CZD) and the Offshore Zone of Deformation (OZD) seismic-reflection data. Concludes that a structurally deformed zone of en echelon folds and faults extends south-to-southeastward offshore from SONGS along the expected CZD trend to within 1 km of the OZD where a data gap prevents positive connection between the two zones of deformation. No evidence of seafloor displacement was found on the CZD, but a probable Neogene age of deformation is postulated.
80-3 Slemmons, D.B., November 5, 1980, Letter to Nuclear Regulatory Commission on SONGS seismic design parameters: in USNRC Safety Evaluation Report, 1980, Appendix E, p. El to E28. (80-4)
Findings of a review of the Offshore Zone of Deformation (OZD) and its probable maximum earthquake including an analysis of fault capability, rate of slip, rupture length, displacement, degree of deformation, maximum historic earthquake, and maximum surface displacement. Concludes that a maximum earthquake of Ms 7 with a slip rate of 0.5 mm/yr should be used for characterizing the OZD in the design of SONGS, Units 2 and 3.
80-4 United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, December 1980, Safety Evaluation Report (Geology and Seismology), Related to the Operation of San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Units 2 and 3, Docket Nos. 50-361 and 50-362, 34 p.
Summarizes findings originally published by the Atomic Energy Commission in a 1972 Safety Evaluation Report for SONGS Units 2 and 3 with the addition of a review of new data from investigations since that time. The report concludes that the new data have not changed the basic 1972 conclusion that a Safe Shutdown Earthquake of 0.67g should be used for SONGS Units 2 and 3. Appendices include: a letter from D. B. Slemmons to the NRC (80-3) evaluating the seismotectonic setting and reviewing methods of estimating the maximum earthquake on the Offshore Zone of Deformation; a letter (with addendum) from R. H. Morris (USGS) to the NRC (80-2) reviewing offshore seismic-reflection profiles in the vicinity of the Cristianitos fault; and a letter from H. W. Menard (USGS) to the NRC (80-1) that is an addendum to the earlier Morris letter.
80-5 Greene, H.G., and Kennedy, M.P., 1980, Addendum to: Review of offshore seismic reflection profiles in the vicinity of the Cristianitos fault, San Onofre, California: in USNRC Safety Evaluation Report, 1980, Appendix G, p. Gl to Gil. (80-4)
Letter supplementing a previous USGS report (Morris, 80-2) that reviewed earlier offshore seismic profiles for the NRC. This letter reviews new seismic profiles. These new data (June 1980 by NEKTON, Inc.) include about 90 km of high-resolution watergun and 3.5 kHz seismic reflection profiles and side-scan sonographs. The new data support the previous conclusions (Morris, 80-2) that the Cristianitos Zone of Deformation (CZD) merges with or is truncated by the Offshore Zone of Deformation (OZD)
69

offshore from SONGS, and that the CZD faults cut shallow strata that lie beneath a prominent unconformity and younger poorly stratified sediments. 80-6 Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1980, Summary report on basic data
from two onshore and six offshore geologic borings, SONGS Units 2 and 3, San Onofre, Consultant's Report for Southern California Edison Co., 10 p. and appendices.
Presents the location, methods, boring/geophysical logs, and age dating results of two onshore rotary and six offshore vibratory-core borings near SONGS. The onshore borings reached depths of 557 and 750 feet with sampling of the terrace deposits, San Mateo Formation; Monterey Formation, and San Onofre Breccia. The offshore vibratory cores recovered up to 47 feet of ocean bottom sediments.
Nannofossil analysis was performed on four samples taken from the 485 to 654 foot interval of the onshore borings. Nannofossil ages of middle Miocene, Luisian (650 feet) to late Miocene, top of lower Mohnian (485 feet) were determined. Seven radiometric age dates were determined from shells and organic material recovered in the offshore sampling. These ages ranged from 12,270 ± 340 years at 38.5 feet to 8,510 _+ 265 years at 16.4 feet of sediment depth.
70

VIDAL NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE 71

116*00'

(KINGtyAN)

114 00'

POWER PLANT SITE __ 73 1.2.74-2.3.4.6.8.10
75-1,2.3.5

10 E 116*00'

18 " B I9

20

(SALTON SEA)

a

too
II4*OO*

F1g. 6 - Areas covered by geologic studies for Vidal and Sundesert (*) Nuclear Power Plant Sites on Needles sheet. See Fig. 1 for location.

NEEDLES

Vidal Site

72-1 Fugro, 1972

75-1 Ku, 1975

73-1 Davis et al., 1973

75-2 Long, 1975

73-2 Fugro, 1973

75-3 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,

74-1 Bull e_t a!., 1974

1975

74-2 Southern California Edison, 1974a

75_4a_e Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1975

74-3 Southern California Edison, 1974b

75-5 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1975a

74-4 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974a

75-6 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1975b

OJ

74-5 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974b

75-7 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1975c

74-6 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974c

Sundesert Site (see SALTON SEA, Fig. 7,

74-7a-g Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974d

for these references).

74-8 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974e

75-7* Lee & Bell, 1975

74-9 Davis, 1974

75-10* Orme, 1975

74-10 Woodward-McNeill & Assoc., 1974f

VIDAL NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE (Fig. 6)
72-1 Fugro, Inc., November 14, 1972, Geologic and Seismic Reconnaissance of the Eastern Mojave Desert and Proposed Nuclear Power Plant Sites, California, 25 p.
Presents the general geologic and seismologic characteristics of the eastern Mojave Desert as related to three alternate locations for the Vidal Nuclear Power Plant: (1) Vidal, Sec. 16, TIN, R24E, (2) Chemehuevi, Sec. 36, TAN, R23E, and (3) Needles, Sees. 9, 16, & 17, TIN, R23E. The report describes regional geology and lithology, Cenozoic sedimentary and alluvial units, and the seismic history of major faults within 130 miles of the sites. A high density of recorded seismicity is shown to have occurred west of a line extending from Baker to Blythe, California, about 50 miles west of the sites. The eastern Mojave Desert is typified by a low density of recorded seismicity with no earthquakes of M 4.0 or greater. The strongest intensity of historic ground shaking for the sites is estimated at V-VI (Modified Mercalli Scale). Three reconnaissance geologic maps, various scales, show the alluvial units of the areas surrounding the proposed sites.
73-1 Davis, G.C., 1973, Woodward-McNeill and Associates, Geologic studies in the eastern Mojave Desert: in Southern California Edison, 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume III, Appendix 2.5A, 15 p.
Summarizes evidence or lack of evidence for extending the active, strike-slip Death Valley fault zone southeastward from the Silver Lake area to the Rice-Vidal-Blythe area. Included is a discussion of faults in the Silver Lake area, Soda-Avawatz Mountains, Bristol Mountains, Granite-Old Dad Mountains, Kilbeck Hills-Old Woman Mountains and Riverside-Big MariaLittle Maria Mountains.
Concludes there is no evidence to support an hypothesis extending the Death Valley fault zone 150 miles to the Rice-Vidal-Blythe area. This report was originally presented in the Vidal Early Site Review Report by Woodward-McNeill (74-4) and in the report by Southern California Edison (74-2).
73-2 Fugro, Inc., January 22, 1973, Reconnaissance Subsurface Investigation, Proposed Vidal Site and Vicinity, Eastern Mojave Desert, 28 p.
A reconnaissance subsurface investigation of the Vidal site undertaken to determine evidence for the presence or absence of faults beneath the site and general site soil conditions. The 27 borings were placed in and around Sec. 16, TIN, R24E and drilled through the Pliocene Bouse Formation and into the Miocene Osborne Formation to depths between 137 and 566 feet. Trenches were placed across suspected surface fault traces located in Sees. 10 & 12, TIN, R24E, and Sec. 20, TIN, R25E, about 1 to 3 miles from the site. The report concludes (1) the Bouse Formation and Osborne Formation are continuous beneath the site with no evidence for faulting, (2) the Bouse-Osborne contact slopes southerly at a gradient of 4 percent, (3) the
74

northwest-trending fault, whose nearest location is 3-1/4 miles northeast of the site, displaces Miocene Copper Basin Formation and Pliocene Bouse Formation, but not Quaternary units, (A) the lack of evidence suggests that near-site faulting need not be considered in site design, (5) regional seismic and historic geology suggest a Safe Shutdown Earthquake need not exceed O.AOg.
74-1 Bull, W.B., 1974, Woodward-McNeill and Associates, Geomorphic tectonic analysis of the Vidal region: in Southern California Edison, 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume III, Appendix 2.5B, 63 p.
Geomorphic study to evaluate possible Quaternary faulting within 5 miles of the Vidal site and to assess the regional Quaternary tectonic stability of the mountain fronts within 20 miles of the site.
Describes six sequences of Quaternary alluvial units ranging in age from 1.5 million years to the present and three types of tectonic regimes: (1) base-level fall in alluvium associated with tectonic and nontectonic mechanisms; (2) accumulation of the Bouse Formation sediments and overlying terrace deposits in response to regional uplift and tilting; and (3) evolution of fluvial systems crossing the mountain fronts.
Conclusions presented are: (1) three zones of base-level fall exist near the Vidal site, one of which occurred from 11,000 to 50,000 years ago and was caused by lateral cutting by the Colorado River; the others occurred before 500,000 years ago and are of uncertain origin; (2) regional uplift of 530 to 800 feet with regional tilting of 10 feet per mile has occurred near Vidal since completion of Bouse Formation deposition (greater than 3 million years ago); (3) mountain fronts in the Vidal region are not tectonically active; and (4) there is no geomorphic evidence of faulting, folding, or tilting during the last 500,000 years within a 20-mile radius of Vidal.
Contains eight tables and 35 figures. The report was originally presented in the Early Site Review Report by Woodward-McNeill (74-4) and can also be found in Volume II of Southern California Edison (74-2). There is an attachment in the Southern California Edison report (74-3) discussing strike-slip fault movement along a postulated fault near Savahia Peak. This attachment concludes that strike-slip movement along the postulated fault has not occurred during the last one million years.
74-2 Southern California Edison Co., 1974a, Information Concerning Geology and Seismology, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2, 3 volumes.
Represents an updated Early Site Review Report (ESRR) by WoodwardMcNeill and Associates (74-4). This report was submitted to the USNRC to provide geologic and seismologic information supporting the adequacy of the Safe Shutdown Earthquake. Discusses regional and site geology, vibratory ground motion and potential for surface faulting. Six appendices are contained in Volume II and III. See the ESRR (74-4) for a more detailed annotation.
75

74-3 Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2, 5 volumes.
Report submitted to the USNRC and ACRS to demonstrate the acceptability of the design acceleration for the Vidal Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE). Subjects covered in this report include: (1) geography and demography; (2) meteorology; (3) hydrology; (4) geology and seismology; and (5) seismic design. Volume I contains parts (1) to (3) listed above. Volumes II and III contain geology, seismology, and seismic design. Volumes III, IV and V contain appendices which include reports by consultants and AEC questions with SCE reponses. The geologic and seismologic discussions are expansions of the Early Site Review Report by Woodward-McNeill (74-4) and Southern California Edison (74-2).
The report states that the eastern Mojave Desert Province containing the Vidal site has a relatively low level of historic seismicity. The maximum reported earthquake for the Province had an epicentral intensity of V (Modified Mercalli Scale) and the largest recorded earthquake had a magnitude of 3.3.
The SSE for the Vidal site is represented by an AEC Regulatory Guide 1.60 spectrum normalized to 0.40g. This is a conservative estimate based on analysis of known historic earthquakes and fault-length vs. maximummagnitude relationships. The SSE was developed assuming that the maximum historic earthquake would occur at the site. The San Andreas fault is 90 miles west of the site and was calculated to be capable of causing maximum ground acceleration at the site of O.lOg.
74-4 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1974a, Early Site Review Report for Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2, 3 volumes, 130 p.
Discusses in detail various aspects of geology, seismology, and foundation engineering for the proposed Vidal Nuclear Plant site about 10 miles west of Parker, Arizona. The scope of study for this report included: (1) literature review, (2) aerial photo interpretation, (3) near-site geologic investigations, (4) age-dating of selected igneous rock units, (5) fault and lineament mapping with trenching, (6) surface (magnetic and gravity anomaly) and subsurface (borehole and seismic refraction) geophysical surveys, (7) site-specific soils investigations (106 borings), and (8) laboratory testing of soil samples.
The report includes detailed discussions of the historic earthquakes of the Mojave Desert, identification of all capable faults, estimates of the maximum earthquake to affect the site, and a discussion of the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE) and Operating Basis Earthquake (OBE).
Based on magnitude-intensity/acceleration relationships, the study identified 22 faults located in the Mojave Desert capable of generating an earthquake that will affect the site. The maximum earthquake in the nearsite area is postulated not to exceed M 5.5. A maximum ground acceleration of 0.40g is recommended for the SSE and an acceleration of 0.20g is recommended for the OBE.
76

74-5 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1974b, Geophysical surveys: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume III, Appendix 2.5C, 14 p.
Summarizes the procedures and conclusions of various geophysical surveys conducted at the Vidal site. Geophysical surveys included: (1) ground magnetic; (2) gravity with Bouguer data reduction; (3) 12-channel seismic refraction; (4) downhole geophysical logging; and (5) crosshole shear-wave velocity measurements. The surveys were conducted to determine lateral correlation of boring data and geophysical parameters of the subsurface materials. The surveys indicate no major faulting beneath the Vidal site.
74-6 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1974c, Boring and test pits, static properties laboratory investigation, dynamic properties laboratory investigation: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume IV, Appendix 2.5D.
Compilation of the Vidal site boring and test pit logs and laboratory test results for a total of 106 borings and six test pits. The logs for the 27 borings drilled by Fugro, Inc.(73-2) are included.
74-7a-g Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1974d, Geologic investigations of postulated extensions of the Pinto Mountain and Death Valley fault zones, eastern Mojave Desert: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5E, 49 p.
Summarizes geologic field investigations conducted in selected areas along postulated extensions of the Death Valley, Pinto Mountain, and Blue Cut faults. Conclusions are: (1) postulated extensions of the Death Valley and Pinto Mountain faults do not exist; (2) the Blue Cut fault is displaced by the northwest-trending Sheep Hole fault and does not extend eastward into the Eagle Mountains; and (3) these three faults are not a hazard to the Vidal plant. The report presents 27 figures, mostly geologic maps of selected local areas.
74-8 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1974e, Geologic studies of the hypothesized Pinto Mountain fault zone extension: in Southern Califfornia Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5E, Attachment B, 7 p.
Geologic studies along the eastern Pinto Mountain fault zone and its hypothesized eastward extension. The Pinto Mountain fault is an eastwesterly oriented left-lateral strike-slip fault in an area of moderate seismicity with earthquakes up to M 5.0, but with no known recent surface rupture. The Pinto Mountain fault truncates the Mesquite fault, which is known to offset Quaternary sediments, and is therefore considered to be
77

more recent. Although the Pinto Mountain fault can be traced 12 miles east of Twentynine Palms to the Tendertrap fault in Humbug Mountain, no evidence could be found for extending the Pinto Mountain fault farther to the east.
74-9 Davis, G.C., 1974, Geologic studies of the hypothesized Death Valley fault zone: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5E, Attachment A, 17 p.
Study of two northwest-trending physiographic lineaments in the Mojave Desert to evaluate whether they were caused by throughgoing structures hypothesized to be extensions of the Death Valley fault zone. The report discusses the faults of the Silver Lake-Halloran Hills, Soda Mountains, Bristol-Old Dad-Granite Mountain, Riverside-Big Maria-Arica Mountain areas and how these faults relate to the hypothesized extension of the Death Valley fault zone. Conclusions of the study are: (1) the amount of rightlateral displacement along the Death Valley fault zone near the Garlock fault is about 8 km; (2) the Death Valley fault zone probably terminates in the Silver Lake-Baker area; (3) the Death Valley fault zone and Avawatz fault zone are not correlative; and (4) it is possible that the Avawatz fault zone extends southward as far as the Bristol Mountains. The report is an attachment to a larger regional study performed by Woodward-McNeill and Associates (74-7a-g).
74-10 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1974f, Earthquake epicenter data: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5F, 49 p.
Computer printout listing earthquake epicenters for the periods 1902 to 1944 and January 1945 to May 1973. Epicenters are plotted on reduced topographic base maps of the Trona, Kingman, Williams, San Bernardino, Needles, Prescott, Santa Ana, Salton Sea, and Phoenix USGS 2° sheets. This report is also in the Early Site Review Report for the Vidal site by Woodward-McNeill and Asociates (74-4) and the report by Southern California Edison (74-2).
75-1 Ku, Teh-Lung, 1975, Th230/U234 dating of arid zone soil carbonates: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5G, Section B, 12 p.
Report summarizing the methodology and results of an age-measurement study using uranium series isotopes on authigenic carbonate (caliche) from paleosols of the Vidal region.
78

75-2 Long, A., 1975, Carbon-24 dating of arid soil carbonates: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2, (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5G, Section C, 2 p.
Letter presenting the results of a Carbon-14 age dating study from paleosols in the Vidal region. The results of this study indicate that the unit "Q3" is Holocene and the other units are Pleistocene in age, i.e., 20,000 years or older.
75-3 United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1975, Limited Early Site Review for the Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Project No. 486, 31 p.
Evaluates the suitability of the Vidal Nuclear Plant site and presents a brief summary of site-planning history, site characteristics, and design criteria. Conclusions are: (1) there are no known geologic hazards present at the Vidal site which would preclude its use as a nuclear reactor station; (2) the proposed 0.40g acceleration for the Safe Shutdown Earthquake and the 0.20g acceleration for the Operating Basis Earthquake are adequately conservative and acceptable; and (3) the seismic input criteria established by Southern California Edison Company are acceptable for the early site review.
75-4a-e Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1975, Supplemental geologic investigations: in Southern California Edison Co., 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5K, 15 p.
Describes trenching and geologic mapping to investigate lineaments and faults near the Vidal site. The geologic mapping program included reconnaissance mapping of faults within the southwestern Riverside Mountains, western Arizona, and the Buckskin-eastern Whipple Mountain areas.
The report concludes that: (1) lineaments along the Colorado River are remnant river-cut terraces; (2) in the southwestern Riverside Mountains, three of the previously mapped faults are old and do not extend beyond the area, and two faults proposed by others do not exist; (3) photogeologic studies of western Arizona indicate no evidence of capable faults within 25 miles of the Vidal site; and (4) in the Buckskin-eastern Whipple Mountains several northwest-trending faults exist, but no evidence was found to indicate they are capable faults. Trench logs and geologic maps (scales 1:24,000 and 1:40,000) accompany the report.
75-5 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1975a, Age dating of Late Tertiary and Quaternary deposits Vidal HTGR site: in Southern California Edison, 1974b, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5G, Section A, 17 p.
The first part of a three-part report of an age-dating study in the
79

region around the Vidal site to gain absolute and/or relative ages for six alluvial sequences that surround the Vidal region. The geochronological techniques used in the study included: (1) paleomagnetic polar reversals; (2) carbon 14; (3) potassium-argon; and (A) uranium-ionium. The first section of the report summarizes the age dates, while the last two sections contain reports by consultants Ku (1975) and Long (1975).
75-6 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1975b, Photogeologic and reconnaissance mapping of the Castle Rock, Mopah and Whipple Mountain front: in Southern California Edison Co., 197Ab, Information Concerning Site Characteristics, Vidal Nuclear Generating Station, Units 1 and 2 (7A-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.51, 15 p.
Study of faulting along the southern Whipple Mountains and the eastern Mopah Range-Turtle Mountain areas using photogeologic mapping, site overflights, and limited surface investigations. Conclusions are: (1) the Castle Rock fault is not a major throughgoing fault and does not displace alluvial units; (2) faulting west of Castle Rock has not displaced an overlying alluvial unit whose age is estimated to be between 50,000 and 200,000 years B.P.; (3) faults in the Mopah Range offset Tertiary volcanic units but not alluvial units; and (A) faulting in the Whipple Mountain-Savahia Peak area is related to pre-Osborne Formation gravity sliding which occurred between 13.5 and 19-21 million years B.P. Three reconnaissance geologic maps are presented (scale 1:2A,000).
75-7 Woodward-McNeill and Associates, 1975c, Relationship of the Bouse and Osborne formations in the vicinity of the Vidal Nuclear Generating Station site: in Southern California Edison Co., 197Ab, Information Concerning Site Characteristics (74-3), Volume V, Appendix 2.5J, 5 p.
Stratigraphic relationships of the Bouse and Osborne Formations and their overlying alluvial units north and east of the Vidal site. This study consisted of geologic field mapping and analyzing subsurface borings to trace a known basal marl of the Bouse Formation. The results of this study indicate that: (1) the basal marl of the Bouse Formation can be extended from Earp, California, to about 3 miles east of the site, and then to the northeast; (2) the consistent outcrop pattern and gentle dip of the marl confirms that the Bouse Formation was deposited on a terrain similar to that of the present day; and (3) no evidence of fault offset in the basal marl between the site and Earp was found. A geologic map (scale 1:37,000>+) with cross sections, electric logs, and three boring logs are included with the report.
80

SUNDESERT NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE 81

1 / / I X "ARKER VALLEY 754aJ

POWER PLANT SITE

j

oo 75-1,2.8.9.11.763.4,8.9.10. /

toe

II

12 13

l«

M6"OO'

17

18 "'I" 19

20

(SAN DIEGO-EL CENTRO)

O 8 16 Miles

3TOO'

Fig. 7 - Areas covered by geologic studies for Sundesert and Vidal (*) Nuclear Power Plant Sites on Salton Sea sheet. See Fig. 1 for location.

SALTON SEA

Sundesert Site

75-1 Fritts, 1975

76-4 Fugro, 1976a

75-2 Fugro, 1975a

76-5 Fugro, 1976b

75-3 Fugro, 1975b

76-6a-d Murray, Bell & Crowe, 1976

75-4 Hughes & Gauthier, 1975

76-7 Shlemon & Purcell, 1976

75-5 Hughes & Hennon, 1975

76-8 Summers, Castleberry & Crosby, 1976

75-6 Kukla & Opdyke, 1975

76-9 Wirth Assoc., 1976a

75-7 Lee & Bell, 1975

76-10 Wirth Assoc., 1976b

oo 75-8 McLamore, 1975

77-1 Crosby & Smith, 1977

75-9 Opdyke & Kukla, 1975

77-2 Fugro, 1977

75-10 Orme, 1975

77-3 San Diego Gas & Electric, 1977

75-11 San Diego Gas & Electric, 1975

77-4 Wirth Assoc., 1977

75-12 76-1 76-2 76-3

Summers, Castleberry & Crosby, 1975 Biehler, 1976 Bull, 1976 Crowell & Crowe, 1976

Vidal Site* (see NEEDLES, Fig. 6 , for these references).
74-7c* Woodward-McNeill, 1974d 75-4a* Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 1975
75-7a,c-e* Woodward-McNeill, 1975d

SUNDESERT NUCLEAR POWER PLANT SITE (Fig. 7)
75-1 Fritts, P.J., 1975, Micropaleontology, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, early site review report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 4, Appendix 2.5E of Appendix A. (75-11)
Microfossil identification of samples from drillholes and outcrops at and near the Sundesert Nuclear Project (SNP) site. The report discusses primarily the Bouse Formation, its environment of deposition, age, and correlation with the middle-to-upper portions of the mid-to-late Pliocene Imperial Formation at Fish Creek. The age of the Bouse Formation is placed at late Pliocene. Fossil-logs for ten drillholes and 15 trenches or outcrop samples are given.
75-2 Fugro, Inc., 1975a, Age dating techniques, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, early site review report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 5, Appendix 2.5J of Appendix A. (77-3)
Results from 28 age-dated samples collected in the lower Colorado River area to establish site geochronology. Dating methods included: (1) K/Ar; (2) radiocarbon; (3) amino-acid racemization; and (4) U/Th. Eight vertebrate fossils from the "Qrd" deposits were dated using amino-acid techniques. Five samples of pedogenic caliche taken from the SNP site were analyzed.
Addenda to the report include work by L.M. Mayer of Dartmouth College, who dated a fault gouge sample, J.L. Bada of Scripps Institute of Oceanography, who performed amino-acid racemization dating of a mammoth bone and several vertebrate samples; and Teh-Lung Ku of the University of Southern California, who performed U/Th age dating on caliche samples and a mammoth tusk.
75-3 Fugro, Inc., 1975b, Geotechnical Investigation, Parker Valley Alternate Site, Sundesert Nuclear Project, 2 volumes, 104 p.
Geologic and foundation engineering studies undertaken to locate a viable alternate site for the Sundesert Nuclear Project. The alternate site is located in Parker Valley approximately 15 miles south of Parker, Arizona, and about 42 miles northeast of the Blythe SNP site. The investigation included: (1) literature search; (2) aerial and remote-sensing mapping; (3) limited geologic mapping within a 25-mile radius of the site; (4) gravity, magnetic and downhole-seismic geophysical surveys; (5) excavation of 30 backhoe trenches and 48 borings; (6) age dating of surrounding rock units, caliche and fossils; (7) paleomagnetic polarity determinations for sediments; (8) soils engineering laboratory testing; and (9) reconaissance groundwater studies.
Quaternary age deposits are offset southwest of the Big Maria Mountains in the "Blythe Graben." Trenching of the graben-bounding faults indicates the 4 to 10 feet of vertical offset in old-to-intermediate-age alluvial fans. The report references the Early Site Review Report by San Diego Gas and Electric Company (75-11) for complete details on the "Blythe Graben."
84

Several aerial photolineaments and stratigraphic discontinuities were studied in the vicinity of the Parker Valley site. Subsurface investigations indicate that these features are localized and related to landsliding, consolidation, or differential erosion, and not to tectonic faulting. A regional seismicity study indicates there are 34 Quaternary faults within a 200-mile radius of the site. The faults thought to be capable of producing ground motion at the Parker Valley site are: (1) San Andreas (M 8.5); (2) Blythe Graben (M 5.0); (3) Chemehuevi Graben (M 5.5); (4) Kofa Mountain (M 5.5); and (5) Sheep Hole (M 7.0).
The Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE) recommended for the Parker Valley site is a Richter magnitude 8.5 on the San Andreas fault 81 miles to the southwest. The Parker Valley site response spectrum is based on a level of ground shaking scaled to 0.20g.
Besides the fault and seismic hazard studies, the report contains descriptions of the general geology of the site and vicinity, site groundwater, regional stratigraphy, and site foundation engineering properties. The report contains five tables, 48 figures, and five appendices (contained in Volume 2). Independent consultant reports are contained in Volume 2 and a supplemental gravity study (Fugro, 76-5) is in Volume 3.
75-4 Hughes, J., and Gauthier, J., 1975, Gravity and magnetic survey, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Early Site Review Report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 5, Appendix 2.51 of Appendix A. (77-3)
Gravity and magnetic survey of the area surrounding the SNP site to detect any linear anomalies that might indicate bedrock faulting. No steep gravity or magnetic gradients were observed. The report contains 18 figures, several location maps, Bouguer and residual gravity maps, a total magnetic intensity map, and ten profiles.
75-5 Hughes, J.B., and Hennon. T.D., 1975, Gravity and magnetic survey of the Parker Valley alternate site: in Fugro, 1975, Geotechnical Investigation, Parker Valley Alternate Site, SNP, Volume 2, Appendix C, 12 p. (75-3)
Detailed study of the gravity and magnetic fields of the Parker Valley Alternate Site and the surrounding area. An elongated gravity and bedrock low (Fig. B) may be the result of a fault dipping 35° and striking east westerly along the northern boundary of the site. Displacement of 500 feet, down on the south, is indicated.
The report contains a location map, Bouguer gravity and residual gravity maps, a total magnetic intensity map, a bedrock elevation map, and nine cross sections. The report was supplemented by an additional gravity study reported by Fugro (76-5).
85

75-6 Kukla, G.J., and Opdyke, N., 1975, Paleomagnetic analysis of sediments at the Parker Valley Alternate Site: in Fugro (75-3), Geotechnical Investigation, Parker Valley Alternate Site, SNP, Volume 2, Appendix B, 17 p.
Remnant paleomagnetic determinations for 36 samples taken from two drillholes at the Parker Valley Alternate Site. Older fluvial deposits (QTrb) underlying the site are reversely magnetic from the ground surface to the sampled depth of 264 feet and are, therefore, older than the Brunes paleomagnetic epoch (700,000 years).
75-7 Lee, GvJC., and Bell, J.W., 1975, Depositional and geomorphic history of the lower Colorado River, Sundesert Nuclear Plant Early Site Review Report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 3, Appendix 2.5D of Appendix A, 19 p. (77-3)
Regional geomorphic study along the lower Colorado River from Cibola, about 25 miles below Blythe, California, to about 3 miles above Parker, Arizona. The purpose of this study was to obtain information about alluvial units that could be used to demonstrate late Cenozoic structural deformation along the lower Colorado River.
The report discusses nine alluvial units that are younger than the late Pliocene Bouse Formation. Based upon present-day elevations of late Cenozoic alluvial units, basin subsidence and regional tilting of the lower Colorado River region took place before the middle Pleistocene. The undisturbed elevations of intermediate age fluvial deposits (Qrd-80,000 to 700,000 years old) indicate no recognizable deformation has occurred since late Pleistocene time. There has been some local fault displacement of alluvial units forming narrow grabens on the south side of the Big Maria Mountains, near Blythe, and in the Chemeheuvi Valley, near Needles. These disturbed alluvial units suggest movement on the Blythe graben is younger than 61,000 years with indications of movement throughout the last 100,000 years. The youngest undisturbed unit (Qf) has been determined to be a minimum of 6,000 years old by a uranium-thorium age date. There have been three cycles of downcutting followed by deposition since the end of the Bouse Formation. The present-day river level has agraded about 150 feet since the end of the Pleistocene. A map of the fluvial features is included.
75-8 McLamore, Reid, 1975, Seismic refraction survey, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Early Site Review Report: in SNP-PSAR, Volume 5, Appendix 2.5H of Appendix A, 6 p. (77-3)
Reconnaissance seismic refraction study made in the SNP siting area having a total line-length of 18,000 feet. Three seismic-velocity layers typify the SNP site: (1) a 1,000- to 3,000-fps unit within the upper 10 feet consisting of unconsolidated fluvial sand, gravel and windblown detritus; (2) a middle 3,000- to 6,500-fps unit of consolidated fluvial sand and gravel with the lower part alluvial gravel; and (3) a lower 7,000- to 8,000-fps unit of clay and silt, probably the Bouse Formation. The report contains two seismic refraction profiles.
86

75-9 Opdyke, N., and Kukla, G.J., 1975, Preliminary report on magneto-stratigraphic study of sediments near Elythe, California and Parker Valley, Arizona, Sundesert Nuclear Plant Early Site Review Report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 3, Appendix 2.5B of Appendix A, 10 p. (77-3).
Paleomagnetic study of drillhole and outcrop samples of late Cenozoic sediments from the Blythe and Parker Valley areas. The purpose of this study was to determine minimum ages for the sediments and evaluate the potential for using magneto-horizons for correlation of drillhole data in the SNP siting area.
The study concluded that the older fluvial deposits (QTrb) have reverse polarity, are older than 0.7 m.y. B.P., and were possibly deposited in the Gilbert reverse polarity epoch (5.1 to 3.3 m.y.B.P.).
There are also some normal polarity layers which may be used for detailed hole-to-hole correlation. The intermediate-age fluvial deposits (Qrd) have normal polarity and were probably deposited during the Brunhes epoch, less than 0.7 m.y.B.P. However, the lower portion of these "Qrd" sediments may have been deposited during the reverse polarity Matuyama epoch, 2.4 to 0.7 m.y.B.P.
75-10 Orme, A.R., 1975, Photogeologic interpretation of structural lineaments in the lower Colorado Valley and vicinity, in Sundesert Nuclear Plant Early Site Review Report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 3, Appendix 2.5-C of Appendix A, 17 p. (77-3)
Regional photogeologic interpretation study of the structural lineaments and Quaternary tectonic features of the lower Colorado River between Lake Mead and the Gulf of California using ERTS satellite imagery and color airphotos.
The study concludes that: (1) there is no firm photogeologic evidence for Quaternary tectonism within the Blythe and Parker Valley areas; (2) photogeologic evidence indicates major tectonism within the siting area ceased before deposition of the Bouse Formation in Pliocene time; (3) late Tertiary fanglomerates bounding mountain ranges in the siting area appear to be undisturbed since deposition; (4) photogeologic evidence for Quaternary tectonism dies out towards the siting area; and (5) there is no photogeologic evidence for extending the Death Valley fault zone southeastward towards the site vicinity.
Three small scale maps show ERTS lineaments for the entire study area, and a larger scale map shows color photolineaments in the Parker Valley area.
75-11 San Diego Gas and Electric Company, 1975, Early Site Review Report for the Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Units 1 & 2, 6 volumes.
Preliminary study submitted to the NRC and the ACRS to determine the suitability of the proposed Blythe site with respect to: (1) demography and geography; (2) hydrology; and (3) geology and seismology. This report was later made a part of a more complete study, the Preliminary Safety Analysis Report (PSAR).
87

Sections of the report of geologic interest are: (1) Section 2.4, Hydrologic Engineering; (2) Section 2.5, Geology and Seismology; (3) Section 3.7.1, Seismic Input; and (4) Section 1.6A, Responses to NRC Questions.
Faults deemed capable of seismic activity were used in the analysis of the Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE) and are discussed in Section 2.5.2-8 and graphically presented in Fig. 2.5-49. The SSE was chosen to be a seismic event of magnitude 8.5 located 35 miles west of the SNP site. This corresponds to the nearest approach of the Sand Hill fault, which is assumed to be a part of the San Andreas system.
The report contains nine tables and 93 figures.
75-12 Summers, K.V., Castleberry, J.S., and Crosby, J.W. Ill, 1975, Geophysical downhole investigation: in Fugro, 1975, Geotechnical Investigation, Parker Valley Alternate Site, SNP, Volume 3, Appendix 2.5A of Appendix A, 8 p. (75-3)
Results of downhole geophysical logging of boreholes at the Parker Valley Alternate Site for the Sundesert Nuclear Project. Natural gamma, neutron-epithermal neutron, neutron-gamma, and gamma-gamma logs were obtained for all of the borings, with spontaneous potential and resistivity for most borings. Three main geophysical units and five subunits used for cross-borehole correlation are described. Four of the unit/subunits are good correlating horizons and have no abrupt changes in elevation. The report contains 39 figures, mostly suites of logs and correlation sections.
76-1 Biehler, S.,1976, Interpretation of regional and local gravity and aeromagnetic data, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Early Site Review Report, in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 5, Appendix 2.5K of Appendix A, 9 p. (75-11)
Results of regional (within a 35-mile radius) and local (within a 15mile radius) gravity studies, and a regional aeromagnetic study for the SNP site to identify major subsurface faults. The regional Bouguer anomaly map encompasses the entire Salton Sea and El Centro 2° topographic map sheets (scale 1:250,000) and was contoured at a 5 milligal interval. Regional gravity trends of the Salton Trough, the Transverse Ranges, and the Sonoran Desert are discussed. The local Bouguer anomaly study was contoured at a 2 milligal interval.
A zone of steep gravity gradients greater than 10 milligal/mile indicates that faults bound the northeast and southwest sides of McCoy Mountains and the northwest side of Mule Mountains northwest of the SNP site. The gravity data also indicate a deep, 4,500 to 9,000 foot, northwesttrending graben extending northwestward from Blythe along McCoy Wash. The aeromagnetic study indicates a general northwest-southeast trend in the anomaly patterns. Only a slight east-west structure is indicated along the Chiriaco fault by the aeromagnetics, but the anomaly does not extend to Blythe.
The report contains four figures, three anomaly maps and a gravity profile extending from the McCoy Mountains northeastward to the Big Maria Mountains.
88

76-2 Bull, W.B., 1976, Tectonic geomorphology of the Sundesert Nuclear Plant Site region, Early Site Review Report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 6, Appendix 2.50 of Appendix A, 28 p. (75-11)
Geomorphic study analyzing the Quaternary tectonic activity of the mountain fronts and mountain-bounding faults that occur from southwestern Arizona to the Salton Trough. The mountain fronts and selected faults are classified into one of three types of tectonic activity: (1) active; (2) slightly active; or (3) inactive, based upon the relative rates of activity of four geomorphic processes. The geomorphic processes include: (1) uplift; (2) channel downcutting; (3) piedmont deposition; and (A) piedmont erosion. In addition, the following characteristics are used to classify the relative tectonic activity of the mountain fronts: (1) basin alluvium; (2) areal features of the mountain fronts (i.e., asymmetry of the ranges); (3) sinuosity of the mountain fronts (perimeter of the mountains/overall length); and (A) valley morphology (rate of stream valley narrowing above mountain front, valley-floor width/valley-height ratio, and valleywidth/valley-height ratio). The faults classified as active by this scheme include the Blue Cut and Eagle Mountain Mine faults, which bound Eagle Mountain on the north and southeast, respectively. Other faults such as the Clemens Well, Salton Creek, Chiriaco, and Sheep Hole are classified as inactive.
The study concludes that the region surrounding the SNP site is tectonically inactive, characterized by a lack of major faulting during the Quaternary, except for minor faulting in the Blythe Graben. The report contains three tables and 23 figures.
76-3 Crowell, J.C., and Crowe, B.M., 1976, The tectonic history of southeasternmost California, Sundesert Nuclear Plant Early Site Review Report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 6, Appendix 2.5N of Appendix A, 39 p. (75-11)
Tectonic history of the region surrounding the SNP site, with special emphasis on Quaternary events. The tectonic history is divided into: (1) pre-late Mesozoic events; (2) late Mesozoic thrusting; (3) TransverseRanges structures; (A) Basin-Range structure; (5) San Andreas fault-Salton Trough system; and (6) minor tectonic features.
The study concludes that active faults of the San Andreas-Salton Trough lie no closer than AO miles to the Sundesert site. Strong active displacement on the San Andreas ends in the vicinity of Niland, where tectonic displacement sidesteps along a spreading center to the Imperial fault. Dip-slip faults subparalleling the Salton Trough and the San Andreas fault within the Chocolate Mountains are related to widening of the trough rather than to transform faulting.
76-4 Fugro, Inc., 1976a, Report of 1852 Fort Yuma earthquake, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Early Site Review Report: in SNP-PSAR, Volume 6, Appendix 2.5P of Appendix A, Al p. (75-11)
A review of previously published reports and a compilation and analysis of the original accounts of the 1852 Fort Yuma earthquake. Documented
89

are the exact date of the earthquake and strong evidence for the epicenter location. The report concludes that: (1) the Fort Yuma earthquake occurred on November 29, 1852 at approximately noon; (2) the epicenter was located in the Salton Trough, probably 25 to 50 miles southwest of Yuma, Arizona; and (3) the magnitude of the event is estimated to have been between 6 and 7.
The report includes six figures and one table. The figures include a chronology of reports, the 1852 geographic setting, locations of the earthquake effects, a generalized fault map, and an earthquake epicenter location map. The table is a comparison chart of the effects of earthquakes in the Imperial Valley-Colorado Delta area.
76-5 Fugro, Inc., 1976b, Supplemental gravity survey, Parker Valley Alternate Site, Sundesert Nuclear Project: in Fugro, 1975, Geotechnical Investigation, Parker Valley Alternate Site, SNP, Volume 3, 7 p. (75-3)
Geophysical study (Fugro, 75-3) of a "linear tightening" of the bedrock gravity contours which were previously (Fugro,75-3) interpreted to represent a possible fault. The additional gravity data indicate that the previously reported east-west gravity lineation cannot now be interpreted as a fault; this is due to a reduction in the steepness of the gravity gradient and to a lack of alignment between the surrounding bedrock faults and the gravity lineaments.
The report contains 11 figures, a location map, Bouguer gravity and residual gravity maps, a bedrock elevation map, and seven cross sections.
76-6 Murray, K., Bell, J., and Crowe, B., 1976, Stratigraphy and structure of the Orocopia, Chocolate and Cargo Muchacho Mountains, southeastern California, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Early Site Review Report: in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 5, Appendix 2.5L of Appendix A, 32 p. (77-3)
Results of a detailed geologic investigation to describe the geology and structural features of the region with attention focused on the relationship between the San Andreas fault system and faults within the mountains. The study incorporates previous work of numerous authors and detailed analyses of LANDSAT and black and white aerial photographs. Ground investigations were concentrated on areas of known or observed faulting.
The report concludes that: (1) the northwest-trending Tertiary and Quaternary faults in the Chocolate Mountains and southeast of the Salton Trough cannot be associated tectonically with the San Andreas fault system; (2) the Clemens Wells fault cannot be traced beyond the Orocopia Mountains, approximately 48 miles from Blythe; (3) the northwest-trending faults in the mountain southeast of Salton Creek are not capable, but those in the alluvial fans on the southwest flank of the mountains may be capable and related to the Salton Trough subsidence; and (4) the Salton Creek fault,38 miles from SNP, is 12 miles long and is considered capable.
The report contains ten figures which include a Mojave-Gila Deserts alluvial units correlation chart, an index of maps, a previous-studies location map, a location map of age-dated samples, stratigraphic columns, and general (1:125,000) and detailed (1:62,500) geologic maps.
90

76-7 Shlemon, R.J., and Purcell, C.W., 1976, Geomorphic reconnaissance, southeastern Mojave Desert, California and Arizona, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Early Site Review Report: in SNP-PSAR, Volume 6, Appendix 2.5M of Appendix A, 28 p. (77-3)
Geomorphic study of the alluvial deposits within a 35-mile radius of the SNP site. The purpose of this study was to map the extent of the alluvium and to determine an approximate age of its various classes. The study concludes that at least three classes of alluvium, and occasionally an older fourth unit, can be delineated.
The alluvium is primarily of Quaternary age, although some may be as old as late Tertiary. Climatic changes probably controlled the regional alluviation, with tectonic pulses superimposed. The effects of "Wisconsin" and possibly the "Illinoian" epochs of pluviality and the criteria used for estimating ages of alluvial units in the southeastern Mojave Desert are discussed.
The report contains 14 figures, a location map, an alluvial deposits map (1:250,000) and 12 photos of various alluvial units.
76-8 Summers, K.V., Castleberry, J.S., and Crosby, J.W., III, 1976, Geophysical downhole investigation, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Early Site Review Report, in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 3, Appendix 2.5A of Appendix A, 8 p. (77-3)
Interpretations of downhole geophysical logs from the SNP site. Natural gamma, neutron-epithermal neutron, neutron-gamma, gamma-gamma, and fluid temperature logs were obtained for each drillhole. Spontaneous potential and resistivity logs were taken in selected drillholes. Seven distinctive horizons are defined and discussed in the report. Elevation changes are noted, but no consistent anomalies are evident. The report contains 47 figures, mostly suites of logs and correlation sections.
76-9 Wirth Associates, 1976a, Phase one regional studies, Sundesert Nuclear Project, Transmission System Environmental Study, 360 p.
First report of a two-phase environmental analysis program conducted for the proposed Sundesert Nuclear Project Transmission System and covering most of southern California. The report is divided into seven sections, Section 2 of which contains geotechnical information. The geotechnical section is a 27-page review by Dames and Moore of the environmental impacts associated with construction and operation of the transmission line system. These impacts are: (1) seismic activity; (2) slope stability; (3) erosion potential; (4) sand dune and windblown sand; (5) expansive soils; (6) subsidence, liquefaction, hydrofraction, and soil/rock collapse; (7) flood hazard and debris flow; and (8) rare or unique geologic features. Faults with the greatest potential impact on the proposed transmission lines are the San Andreas, San Jacinto and Elsinore.
Six multicolored geotechnical maps are presented at a scale of 1:1,000,000 along with four tables listing major earthquakes, definitions of sensitivity levels and a final sensitivity analysis.
91

76-10 Wirth Associates, 1976b, Phase two corridor studies, Sundesert Nuclear Project, Transmission System Environmental Study, 360 p.
Second report of a transmission-line corridor study conducted for the proposed Sundesert Nuclear Project. The purpose of these studies was to assess the environmental impact of the construction and operation of the 500 KV transmission lines. The study reviewed in greater detail the corridors identified in Phase 1 (Wirth, 76-9).
Section 2 of the report contains geotechnical data and a discussion of geologic hazards similar to those in the earlier report. The report indicates that the greatest impact on the geologic environment would be from erosion. Northwest-trending faults with a potential impact on the transmission line include: (1) San Andreas system; (2) San Jacinto system; (3) Whittier-Elsfnore fault.
One table of geotechnical hazards and eleven multicolored figures (scale 1:1,000,000) are presented in section 2.
77-1 Crosby, J.W., III, and Smith, B., 1977, Borehole geophysical logs, Sundesert Nuclear Plant, Units 1 & 2; in the SNP-PSAR, Volume 4, Appendix 2.5E, 2 p. (77-3)
The results of a borehole geophysical investigation conducted at the SNP site for Units 1 and 2. Natural gamma, point resistance, spontaneous potential, and caliper logs were obtained. The data from this study were compared to previous borehole geophysical logging studies done at the SNP site (Summers et al., 75-12) and indicated that no fault displacements are evident from data in the borehole logs. The report contains 28 figures, mostly correlation profiles and a complete suite of logs.
77-2 Fugro, Inc., 1977, Foundation Engineering Report, Power Plant Structures, Units 1 and 2, Sundesert Nuclear Project, 80 p.
Results of a site-specific foundation study for the power block of the SNP, Units 1 and 2. This study presents a description of the site's subsurface geologic units and a dynamic analysis of the subsidence and liquefaction potential using four selected earthquakes scaled to the 0.35g Safe Shutdown Earthquake. The report contains ten tables of soils properties and 75 figures, including eight subsurface profiles.
77-3 San Diego Gas and Electric Co., 1977, Preliminary Safety Analysis Report for the Sundesert Nuclear Power Plant, Units 1 and 2, 23 volumes.
Preliminary engineering and geotechnical report for the siting of a nuclear generating station near Elythe, California. Section 2 of the report contains discussions of: (1) geography - demography; (2) nearby facilities; (3) meteorology; (4) hydrologic engineering; and (5) geology, seismology, and geotechnical engineering. Also included is a six-volume appendix containing the Early Site Review Report (ESRR) by San Diego Gas and Electric Co. (75-11). The ESRR is referred to extensively for the geologic and seismologic discussions.
92

The Safe Shutdown Earthquake (SSE) for the site was selected to be a M 8.5 event on the Sand Hills fault of the San Andreas fault system, 35 miles west of the site. The SSE level of ground shaking was calculated by normalizing the NRC design response spectra to a 0.35g and 0.233g horizontal and vertical acceleration, respectively.
77-4 Wirth Associates, 1977, Devers to Rainbow Studies, Sundesert Nuclear Project Transmissions System Environmental Study, 785 p. Study of a specific transmission line corridor for the Sundesert
Nuclear Project which would extend from the Devers Substation near Desert Hot Springs, California, west through San Gorgonio Pass and thence southward to Rainbow Substation in northern San Diego County.
Section 2 of the report, 39 pages long, is divided into two parts. The first part is a general overview of the environmental conditions, the second an assessment of impact by geotechnical features. The geotechnical hazards evaluated are similar to those discussed in Phase 1 and 2 of the SNP Transmission Line Regional Studies (Wirth, 76-9, 76-10). The impact and seismic hazard from the San Andreas, San Jacinto and Whittier-Elsinore faults are briefly discussed with references to specific sections of the transmission lines.
Ten multicolored figures are included (scale 1:280,000+) which present maps of specific geotechnical hazards, a summary map, and the levels of environmental impact. Three tables summarize the geotechnical features, hazard potential, and impact level.
93

PART III
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF ENGINEERING GEOLOGY REPORTS PREPARED TO SATISFY THE ALQUIST-PRIOLO SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES ACT IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
by
D. L. Lamar and P. J. Scrivner

CONTENTS

PREFACE. ............................. INTRODUCTION ...........................
Approach. .......................... Acknowledgments . ..................... ALQUIST-PRIOLO SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES ACT (AP) REPORTS BIBLIOGRAPHY 1952 Earthquake Faults, Kern County ............. Garlock and Big Pine Faults, Kern County. .......... San Andreas Fault, Kern County. ............... San Andreas Fault, Los Angeles County ............ San Andreas Fault, San Bernardino County. .......... Mission Creek and Associated Faults, Riverside County .... San Jacinto Fault Zone, San Bernardino County ........ San Jacinto Fault Zone, Riverside County. .......... San Fernando Area Faults, Los Angeles County. ........ Raymond Hill Fault, Los Angeles County. ........... Inglewood-Newport Fault Zone, Los Angeles and Orange Counties Elsinore Fault Zone, Riverside County ............ REFERENCES ............................

ii 1 1 1 3 8 10 10 16 35 46 52 58 76 77 82 98
103

111

ILLUSTRATIONS

Page

Fig. 1 Principal faults in southern California covered by AlquistPriolo Special Studies Zones (Hart, 1980) and outlines of detailed maps. .......................

2

Fig. 2 Explanation of symbols for detailed maps (Figs. 3-26) showing locations of engineering geology reports ...... 5

Fig. 3 Locations of engineering geology reports along White Wolf and other faults that broke during the 1952 Kern County earthquake .........................

7

Fig. 4 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas, Big Pine and Garlock faults between Cuddy Valley and Liebre
Mountain areas .......................

7

Fig. 5 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault between Lake Hughes and Palmdale areas ........ 12

Fig. 6 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in Lake Hughes area. ................. 12

Fig. 7 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in Sleepy Valley area. ................ 13

Fig. 8 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in western Palmdale area ............... 14

Fig. 9 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in eastern Palmdale area ............... 15

Fig. 10 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault between Littlerock and Telegraph Peak areas. ..... 32

Fig. 11 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault between Devore and San Gorgonio Mountain areas .... 32

Fig. 12 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in western San Bernardino area ............ 33

Fig. 13 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in eastern San Bernardino area ............ 34

Fig. 14 Locations of engineering geology reports along Mission Creek and Morongo Valley faults between San Gorgonio Mountain and
Seven Palms Valley areas .................. 44

Fig. 15 Locations of engineering geology reports along Mission Creek fault in City of Desert Hot Springs. ............ 45

Fig. 16 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto fault zone between Telegraph Peak and San Bernardino areas . 50

ILLUSTRATIONS (cont'd.) Fig. 17 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto
fault zone in Colton area. ................. 51 Fig. 18 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto
fault zone between Sunnymead and Idyllwild areas ...... 56 Fig. 19 Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto
fault zone in Heraet area .................. 57 Fig. 20 Locations of engineering geology reports along faults in
San Fernando area and Raymond Hill fault .......... 74 Fig. 21 Locations of engineering geology reports along faults in
San Fernando area. ..................... 75 Fig. 22 Locations of engineering geology reports along Inglewood-
Newport fault zone between Inglewood and Seal Beach areas. . 78 Fig. 23 Locations of engineering geology reports along faults in
Inglewood area ....................... 79 Fig. 24 Locations of engineering geology reports along Inglewood-
Newport fault zone in Long Beach and Signal Hill areas ... 80 Fig. 25 Locations of engineering geology reports along Inglewood-
Newport fault zone in Huntington Beach area. ........ 81 Fig. 26 Locations of engineering geology reports along strands of
Elsinore fault zone. .................... 97
vi

INTRODUCTION
This annotated bibliography lists reports prepared to satisfy the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act (AP); these reports include detailed trench logs across the following faults in southern California: San Andreas, San Jacinto, San Fernando, Inglewood-Newport, WhittierElsinore, Garlock, and White Wolf (Fig. 1).
Approach Reports on file with the California Division of Mines and Geology
(CDMG) and individual counties, cities and consultants were reviewed. It was found that many reports available locally have not been filed with the CDMG and, conversely, many reports filed with the CDMG are difficult to obtain locally because old files have been retired. For some jurisdictions, such as Riverside County, it was relatively easy to identify all appropriate reports; in others the AP reports were filed with many other engineering geology reports and difficult to separate. Initially it was planned to make the bibliography comprehensive and include all AP reports for southern California, but the volume of reports and time required to comb many local files made this impossible. It was also found that many AP studies did not include trenching and offered little or no new information; most of these were omitted. We attempted to include all of the most significant reports which describe either trenches with faulting or trenches located across a fault. We would appreciate information on such additional reports overlooked during our search or accomplished since for inclusion in possible revised editions.
Acknowledgment s The patience and cooperation of the following individuals in allowing
access to their files, essential for the completion of this project, are gratefully acknowledged: Robert Sydnor and Earl Hart, California Division

117° San Bernardino Co.

116°

Ventura Co. % F| 2Q \

NIFZ: Newport-Inglewood fault zone; SFFZ: San Fernando fault zone; WF: Whittier fault; WWF: White Wolf fault.
Fig. 1 - Principal faults in southern California covered by Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones (Hart, 1980) and outlines of detailed maps.

of Mines and Geology; Anthony Brown, Riverside County; Michael Smith and Mark Spikerman, Buena Engineers; Arthur Keene, David Poppler, Robert Smith, and James Shuttleworth, Los Angeles County Engineer; Lyle Timberlake, Kern County Public Works; Dennis Evans, Consultant to City of Signal Hill; Xeno Colazas and Larry Olson, City of Long Beach; Alrick Stenzel, City of Huntington Beach; and Cheri Leslie, Culver City Redevelopment Agency. We also thank Earl Hart, Richard Moore and Merl Smith, California Division of Mines and Geology, for loaning originals of maps and providing other materials. The report was reviewed by Drs. Paul M. Merifield and Mason L. Hill. The manuscript was typed by Miss Laurie Auerbach, and Miss Melanie Kissee and Miss Sandra Petitjean drafted the illustrations.
ALQUIST-PRIOLO SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES ACT (AP) REPORTS BIBLIOGRAPHY Locations of the study areas have been plotted on our file copies of
the State of California Special Studies Zones 7-1/2 minute quadrangles prepared by the California Division of Mines and Geology, and are shown on smaller scale strip maps along individual fault zones (Fig. 1). The strip maps and bibliography indicate the appropriate 7-1/2 minute quadrangle. The reports on the study areas are identified on the maps and in the bibliography by numbers for each city and county. Reports for Riverside County are identified by the number assigned by the County geologist (Anthony Brown, personal communication, 1982). For other jurisdictions which did not have applicable numbering systems we have assigned the numbers (shown in parentheses) and included a brief site description. Reports on file with the California Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG) are identified by the CDMG number (Lo and Moreno, 1980, and personal communication, Earl Hart, 1983). The date of the report, investigating firm or geologist and project number, if any, are also included for identification.
The results of the investigation are summarized in a brief paragraph which indicates approximate depth(s) of trench(es), name of fault zone, name and age of rock units exposed in trench(es), units displaced and nature of

Potentially active faults shown on U.S. Geological Survey 7^ minute quadrangle with State of California Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones (AP) delineated by California Division of Mines and Geology.
Other faults referred to in engineering geology reports.
Physiographic evidence of faulting referred to in report.
Open circle indicates location of report with no trenching identified by Riverside County number (#32). Fault located to northeast on basis of physiographic evidence (1*).

Ages of units reported in trenches: 1 <10,000 years old, Holocene alluvium.
2 upper Pleistocene, 10,000 - 500,000 years old, older alluvium, alluvial terrace deposits, and Pauba Formation (Kennedy, 1977).
3 lower Pleistocene, 500,000 - 3,000.000 years old, Temecula Arkose (Kennedy, 1977).
4 pre-Pleistocene, >3,000,000 years old.

#105

Number within circle indicates trench(es) dug where number indicates age(s) of units reported using the above key. This symbol indicates no evidence of faulting in Holocene alluvium (1) across fault and no - - older units penetrated by test trench(es).

As above, except trench located northeast of fault. ^^ #72
Fig. 2 - Explanation of representative symbols for detailed maps (Figs. 3-26) showing locations of engineering geology reports.

No evidence of faulting in older alluvium (2) overlain by Holocene alluvium (1) in trench(es) across fault.

As above, except trench located northeast of fault. #4

#258

Line through circle indicates fault observed in trench cutting Holocene alluvium (1).

33. Physiographic evidence of faulting (1*) and faulted older fan deposits (2) in trench.

Holocene alluvium (1) faulted against Pauba Formation (2) in trench,

#34 #199

Older alluvium (2) overlain by Holocene alluvium (1) faulted against pre-Pleistocene (4) bedrock in trench(es) across fault.
Temecula Formation (3) faulted against Pauba Formation (2); line at right angle to fault and interruption of fault line indicates older faulted rock units are overlain unconformably by unfaulted Holocene alluvium (1).

Fig. 2 (continued)

faulting, if any, and other evidence of faulting. The results are also summarized graphically on the detailed maps (Figs. 3-26) by symbols developed for this project and defined in Fig. 2. These symbols, modified from a similar scheme presented by Ziony et al. (1973), allow quick determination of the results and locations of individual investigations identified by county or city number. The location of each report is shown by one or more circles which show diagrammatically the ages of rock units exposed and whether the units are faulted. A blank circle indicates no trenching. A number "1" with an asterisk outside the circle means that physiographic evidence of faulting is present. The numbers inside the circle represent ages of earth materials exposed in the trenches (Fig. 2).
Lines through circles as extensions of faults on the map indicate that the fault was exposed in the trench(es). Lines parallel to the fault through the circle indicate that subsidiary faults were observed in the trench(es). A circle located adjacent to the fault line shows position of the trench(es), i.e., northeast or southwest of fault. Lines between numbers in the circle at right angles to the adjacent fault represent depositional contacts observed in the trench. Figure 2 shows examples of most of the symbols illustrated on the detailed maps. Where more than one trench was logged with different results, data from the trench indicating the greatest earthquake hazards are summarized in the symbol.
Individual fault zones are discussed from north to south; the stripmaps and report summaries generally run from northwest to southeast.

\
Fig. 3 - Locations of engineering geology reports along White Wolf and other faults that broke during the 1952 Kern County earthquake by Kern County number. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.
Fig. 4 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas, Big Pine and Garlock faults between Cuddy Valley and Liebre Mountain areas by Kern and Los Angeles (*) County numbers. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County
(City) of
Jurisdiction

County
(City)
File Number

CDMG AP
File Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang te( s)

Date of Invest i gat ing Report ( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

1952 Earthquake Faults. Kern County (Fig. 3)

Kern

(9) 950

Rio Bravo

10/78 Wi I I iam H. Park

Ranch

Parcel Map No. 3040 Pa rce I 2

Five trenches, 6 to 7 feet deep, across trace of 1952 Kern County earthquake
rupture (CDMG, 1967ww). Trenches 1,4: faulting in PIio-PI«istocene age clay, sand and gravel deposits and overlying Holocene soil profife (Qp and QaI (?)
of Smith,. 1964).

Kern

(10) 263

Rio Bravo

4/78 Wi I I iam H. Park

Ranch

(super-

sedes

7/76 re-

port)

Parcel Map No. 3604

Four trenches, 6 to 7 feet deep, northeast of trace of 1952 Kern County earthquake rupture (CDMG, 1976ww). Trench 1: normal faulting in gray and brown
sandstones (Qp of Smith, 1964). Trench 3,4: normal faulting in white to gray sandstone and overlying "topsoil" (Qp and QaI (?) of Smith, 1964).

Kern

(11) 1000

Rio Bravo

4/79 Wi I I iam H. Park

00 Ranch

Parcel Map No. 5427 Pa rceI 1

Two trenches, 7 to 10 feet deep, across trace of 1952 Kern County earthquake
rupture (CDMG, 1976ww). Trenches 1,2: normal faulting with minimum vertical offset of 8 feet, in PIio-Pleistocene Kern River Series and clays, sands and gravels of Holocene age (Qp and QaI (?) of Smith, 1964).

Kern

(12)

887

Rio Bravo

11/78 Wi I I iam H. Park

Ranch

Parcel Map No. 4646 Parcels A and B

Four trenches, 5 to 7 feet deep, across trace of 1952 Kern County earthquake rupture (CDMG, 1976ww). Trenches 1,3,4: normal faulting in PIio-Pleistocene Kern River Series and overlying clays, sands and gravels of Holocene Age (Qp
and Qal (?) of Smith, 1964).

Kern

(13) 1348

Rio Bravo

8/77 Wi I I iam H. Park

Ranch

Parcel Map No. 3044 Pa rceI 4

One trench, 6 feet deep, southwest of trace of 1952 Kern County earthquake rupture (CDMG, 1976ww). Normal faulting, with minimum estimated vertical displacement of 20 feet, in PIio-Pleistocene continental rocks and overlying
Holocene soil (Qp and Qal (?) of Smith, 1964).

Kern

(14) 1030

Rio Bravo

9/78 Wi I I iam H. Park

Ranch

Parcel Map No. 4731

Four trenches, 5 feet deep, across trace of 1952 Kern County earthquake rupture (CDMG, 1976ww). Trench 1: faulting in PIio-Pleistocene age sand and gravel
deposits (Qp of Smith, 1964).

County
(City) of
Jurisdiction

County (City)
File Number

CDMG AP File Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang I e( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report ( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

1952 Earthauake Faults . Kern County ( Fiq. 3)

Kern (15)

SW 1/U Breckenridge
Mounta in

6/79

Wi 1 1 iam H. Park

Cummings Property Parcel Map No. 5266

One trench, 7 feet deep, across subsidiary fault northwest of main trace of White Wolf fault (CDMG, 1976vv). No faulting in arkosic pebbly sand, silt
and clay of Holocene age (Qal (?) of Smith, 196U).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle! s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog ist

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

Gar lock and Big Pine Faults. Kern County (Fig. U)

Kern

(6) 663

Frazier Mtn.

8/19/77 John D. MerriI I

Project #74088

Four trenches, maximum depth 8-1/2 feet, across trace of Garlock fault (CDMG,
l97Ukk). Trenches 1-U: no faulting in Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Kern

(7)

72

Cuddy Vat ley

2/75

Bryant-Park and

Seventh Day Adventist

Associates, Inc,

Church and School Site,

Lake of the Woods

One trench, 6 feet deep, across Big Pine fault (CDMG, 197UJJ). Normal faulting
with 9 inches of vertical displacement in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Kern

(8) 1U29

Frazier Mtn.

6/18/81 Geoplan, Inc.

Project #15501*

Fourteen trenches, average depth 6 feet, across and south of trace of Garlock fault (CDMG, 197Ukk). Trenches across Garlock fault show no faulting in fanglomerate or overlying residual soil (Qt and Qal of Jennings and Strand, 1969). Trench 1U, south of Garlock fault, exposed subsidiary fault in granite, but does not displace overlying residual soil (gra and Qal of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

San Andreas Fault. Kern County (Fig. 1*)

Kern

(D

38

SawmiI I Mtn.

03/U/70 F. Beach Leighton

10/22/71

Mill Potrero Development Area, Project #1620

Seven trenches and thirty-eight pits, maximum depth 12 feet, across San Andreas
fault (CDMG, 197UII). Pits 2,3,8,10,12: "Ancestral soil zones, recent alluvium and slopewash debris are faulted and contorted within active trace of fault"
(Qal of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Kern

(2) 211*

Cuddy Valley

12/16/71 F. Beach Leighton and Associates, Inc.

Project #1652

Seven test pits, unspecified depth, across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197UJJ). Pits 1-U: Highly sheared bedrock and recent faulting in older and Holocene alluvium (m-ls, ms, Qt and Qal of Jennings and Strand, 1969). Pits 5 and 7: faulted bedrock, but no faulting in overlying Holocene alluvium (Qal of Jennings
and Strand, 1969).

Kern

(3) 18 Cuddy Valley 10/25/74 Joseph A. Johnson

Lot 96, Tract 33U8

One trench, 5-1/2 feet deep, south of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197UJJ). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geo log ist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Kern County (Fig. U)

Kern

(U)

51

Frazier Mtn.

1/75

Bryant-Park and

Associates, Inc.

Lot Nos. 7,8,9,10, Block 18, Tract U, Frazier Mtn. Park

One trench, 6 feet deep, north of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ukk). No faulting in "granitic fanglomerate" or overlying "pebbly, topsoil mantle" (Qt and QaI of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Kern

(5) 1U66

Frazier Mtn.

1/25/82 Geoplan, Inc.

Project #15687

Two trenches, maximum depth 6-1/2 feet, across trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ukk). Trenches 1,2: no faulting in "dark fanglomerate" or overlying Holocene alluvium (Qt and QaI of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

\\

San Andreas Fault
ft<1 fi*&&
V

\ __ __

___ _\ I _ __

\ GR) 615 Xf'gure 6

#2 #3 & 4

SCALE

Fig. 5 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault between Lake Hughes and Palmdale areas by Los Angeles County number. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of
symbols.

Fig. 6 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in Lake Hughes area by Los Angeles County number. See Fig. 5 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

u>
Fig. 7 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in Sleepy Valley area by Los Angeles County number. See Fig. 5 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

Fig. 8 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in western Palmdale area by Los Angeles County and City of Palmdale (*) numbers. See Fig. 5 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

Fig. 9 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in eastern Palmdale area by Los Angeles County number. See Fig. 5 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County

County CDMG

(City)

(City) AP

7-1/2

of

Fi le Fi le

Minute

Jurisdiction Number Number Quadrangle( s)

Date of Invest igating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Fiqs. U-101

Los Angeles (1) 12«4l Lebec

9/9/80 Michael V. Smith

File #8027-1. 38101 German Post Road, Gorman.

One trench, maximum depth 6 feet, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Mt). No faulting in PIio-Pleistocene Hungry Valley Formation or Holocene alluvium (Puc and QaI of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Los Angeles (2)

Lake Hughes

2s/u1p9p/le7-5 ment: 5/03/78

Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1330-L01

Three trenches and one pit, 6-12 feet deep, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). No faulting in quartz monzonite bedrock, fanglomerate or Holocene alluvium (ggd(?), Qf and QaI of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (3)

Lake Hughes

5/U/72 Earl R. Morley, Jr.

Phase I, Forest Lakes Mobile Home Estates, Munz Lake.

One trench, 15 feet deep, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). Jointing and shearing in granitic bedrock, but no faulting in Holocene alluvium (dgn and QaI of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles ((*)

Lake Hughes

1/18/70 James E. Slosson and Associates

Proposed Manzanita Hills Village Mobile Home Park, vicinity of Lake Hughes.

Six trenches, U-9 feet deep, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). Trenches 2,3: fractured and sheared granodiorite bedrock, but no faulting in Holocene alluvium or fill material (ggd, QaI and af of Beeby, 1979). Trenches 5,6: highly weathered, fractured and sheared granodiorite with we I I-developed joints. Fault location approximately determined by changes in intensity of fracturing, shearing and jointing in granodiorite bedrock (ggd of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (5) 1U10 Lake Hughes

9/2/81 Geoplan, Inc.

Project #15578. 15530 West Alps Drive, Elizabeth Lake.

One trench, unspecified depth, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). No faulting in older alluvial fan deposits or Holocene alluvium (Qof and QaI of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (6) 1181 Lake Hughes

6/26/80 Michael V. Smith

File #8021-1. U2818 Apollo Drive, Elizabeth Lake.

Two trenches, 6 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux) Trenches 1,2: No faulting in buff arkose or clay shale members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation or residual soil (Tab, Tas and Qpa of Beeby, 1979).

County (City)
of Jurisd ict ion

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. U-10)

Los Angeles (7) 1*425

Lake Hughes

10/26/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1900-L01. Lot UU, Tract 19278, Apollo Drive, El izabeth Lake.

One trench, 6 1/2 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197*4x). No faulting in buff arkose or clay shale member of the Pliocene Anaverde
Formation or residual soil (Tab, Tas and QaI of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (8) 1055 Lake Hughes

10/29/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7957-1. 1U609 Flintstone Drive, Elizabeth Lake.

One trench, 6 feet deep, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux) No faulting in clay shale member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation or residual soil
(Tas and QaI of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (9)

Lake Hughes

7/27/7*4 William Wa i sge rbe r and Associates

Ref. No. 7U183 L 053 E. Lot 77, Tract 2U829, Clydesdale Road, Elizabeth Lake.

One trench, maximum depth 5 feet, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). No faulting in arkosic sandstone bedrock or Holocene alluvium (Tab and Qsw of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (10) 1377 Lake Hughes

8/7/81

Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-1893-L01. 1U370 Elizabeth Lake Road, Elizabeth
Lake.

Three trenches, maximum 8 feet deep, across subsidiary fault of North Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197*4x). Trench 2: faulting in Holocene fan deposits, but no
faulting in overlying Holocene alluvium (Qf and QaI of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (86 B*)

Lake Hughes

11/U/82 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-201U-L01

Three trenches, 6 to 15 feet deep, across main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197UX). Trench 1: faulting in older alluvium and ponded alluvium (Qoa and Qpa
of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (87

Lake Hughes

6/18/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-1873-L01

One trench, maximum depth 15 feet, across unnamed subsidiary fault southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (Beeby, 1979). No faulting in older or Holocene
fan deposits (Qof and QaI of Beeby, 1979).

* Not filed with Los Angeles County; may be consulted at Buena Engineers, U2326 10th St. West, Lancaster, CaIifornia.

County (City)
of Juri sd ict ion

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP File
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang I e( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report( s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog ist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. M-10)

Los Angeles (88 B*)

Lake Hughes

6/25/82 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-1986-L01

Two trenches, 5 to 10 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Mx). Trench 1: faulting in clay shale member of Pliocene Anaverde
Formation, but no faulting in overlying residual soil (Tas of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (89)

Lake Hughes

12/12/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7963-3

Two trenches, 6 feet deep, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). Trench 1 faulting in buff arkose and clay shale member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation. No faulting in overlying residual soil (Tab and Tas of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (90 B*)

Lake Hughes

12/3/81

Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-1920-L02

oo Los Angeles (91)

Two trenches, maximum depth 9 feet, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Mx). Trenches 1,2: possible faulting in buff arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation and older alluvium (Tab and Qoa of Beeby, 1979).

Lake Hughes

10/12/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1918-L01

Three trenches, 5 to 8 feet deep, across subsidiary faults northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (Beeby, 1979). Trenches 1,3 (Lots M8,50): faulting in older alluvium (Qoa of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (92 B*)

Lake Hughes

3/25/82 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-19UO-L01

Two trenches, 5 feet deep, across subsidiary fault northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (Beeby, 1979). Trenches 1,2: no faulting in buff arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation, older alluvium or residual soil (Tab and Qoa
of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (93)

Lake Hughes

10/20/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-1930-L01

Four trenches, 5 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Mx). Trench E-1: possible faulting in red arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation (Tar of Beeby, 1979). Trench T-2: possible faulting in buff arkose and clay shale members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation. No faulting in residual
soil (Tab and Tas of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (9U) 1M52 Lake Hughes

9/22/81

Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1913-L01

One trench, 7 feet deep, southwest of strand of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). No faulting in red arkose, buff arkose and clay shale members of Pliocene Ana-
verde Formation or residual soil (Tar, Tab and Tas of Beeby, 1979).

* Not filed with Los Angeles County; may be consulted at Buena Engineers, U2326 10th St. West, Lancaster, Ca I i fo rn i a .

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
File
Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2
Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating
Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. U-10)

Los Angeles (95 B*)

Lake Hughes

11/19/82 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #8-2021-L01

One trench, 5 to 9 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). Faulting in buff arkose and clay shale members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation (Tab and Tas of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (96 B*)

Lake Hughes

11/6/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1926-L01

One trench, 5 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). Faulting in buff arkose and clay shale members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation and residual soil (Tab and Tas of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (97)

Lake Hughes

6/7/82

Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-W8-L03

Two trenches, maximum depth 13 feet, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ux). Trench 2: faulting in buff arkose and clay shale members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation (Tab and Tas of Beeby, 1979) and fault placing Pre-Tertiary granitic rock against clay shale member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation (dgn and Tas of Beeby, 1979).

Los Angeles (11)

urn

Del Sur

10/8/81 Buena Engineers

Job #B-186U-L01. Tentative Minor Land Division Map #13877,
Leona VaI ley.

Three trenches, U-6 feet deep, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979y). No faulting in pre-Tertiary diorite-gneiss complex, overlying fan deposits and Holocene alluvium or colluvium (dgn, Qf and QaI of Kahle, et al.. 1975).

Los Angeles (12)

1195

Del Sur

5/26/80 Eberhart-Axten and Assoc., Inc.

W.O. 1072. PM #13113, Leona Valley.

Eight trenches, averaging 7-8 feet deep, across the main trace, a splinter of the north branch and the ancestral trace of the San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979y). Trenches 3,4,5,6,7: series of en echelon faults of the main trace of San Andreas expressed in "two primary sets" in Pliocene Anaverde buff arkose member, older fan deposits and Holocene alluvium (Tab, Qof and Qa I (?) of Kahle, et al . . 1975). Trench 8: ponded alluvium, gouge zones, brecciation and faulting on north branch of San Andreas in dark gray arkosic sandstone of Pliocene Anaverde Formation and Holocene alluvium (Tab and Qa I of Kahle, et a I . . 1975). Trenches 1E,2,3,5: faulting on ancestral trace of San Andreas in shale and buff arkose members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation, older fan deposits and Holocene alluvium (Tab, Tas, Qof and Qa I of Kahle, et a I . . 1975). In the northwest corner of the site, a geomorphica I ly we I I -rep resented thrust fault has placed the shale units of the Pliocene Anaverde Formation against the buff arkose unit (Tab and Tas of Kahle,
et a_L., 1975).

* Not filed with Los Angeles County; may be consulted at Buena Engineers, 42326 10th St. West, Lancaster, CaIifornia.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP 7-1/2 Fi le Minute Number Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. U-10)

Los Angeles (13)

DeI Su r

9/26/79 Michael V. Smith

File #79U4-1. Tentative Land Division Map #11625, Leona Valley.

One trench, 6 feet deep, southwest of San Andreas fault (CQ^G, 1979y). No faulting in pre-Tertiary diorite-gneiss complex or residual soil (dgn and Qc of Kahle, et al, 1975).

Los Angeles (14)

DeI Su r

9/28/79 John D. MerriI I

Project #95976

Two trenches, maximum depth 6 feet, across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979y). Trenches 1,2: Strong fracturing, shearing and clay gouge in pre-Tertiary hornblende diorite breccia bedrock and Pliocene Anaverde Formation (dgn and Tab (?)
of Kahle, et a [.. 1975). No faulting in overlying residual soil (Ql of Kahle, et a_i., 1975).

Los Angeles (15)

1158

Sleepy VaI ley

U/18/80 Eberhart-Axten and Assoc., Inc.

W.O. 1071. Tentative Tract 39U60, Leona Valley.

K> o

Forty test pits, 5-15 feet deep, northeast of Leona Valley fault and southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in pre-Tertiary diorite-gneiss com-

plex or overlying fan deposits and Holocene colluvium (dgn, Qof and QaI of Kahle,

et aj., 1975).

Los Angeles (16)

Sleepy Valley 11/4/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job. #B-1925-L01. Tentative Minor Land Division Map 114548, Leona VaI ley.

Three trenches, 4-15 feet deep, across Leona Avenue and subsidiary faults (CDMG, 1979Z). Trench C: fault gouge, fractures and numerous faults in pre-Tertiary diorite-gneiss complex, granite and overlying Pleistocene older fan deposits (dgn and Qof of Kahle, et aj.., 1975).

Los Angeles (17)

889 Sleepy Valley 12/11/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-36. Tentative PM #11467, Leona VaI ley.

Five trenches, 6-10 feet deep, across Leona Avenue fault (CDMG, 1979z). Trench 1: brecciation, shearing and faulting in pre-Tertiary diorite-gneiss complex. No faulting in overlying residual soil (dgn and QaI (?) of Kahle, et al.. 1975).

Los Angeles (18)

Sleepy VaI ley 10/12/76 Wi I I Jam Wa isgerber and Associates

Reference #76287-EIR-0041. 9306 Leona Avenue, Leona Valley.

One trench, maximum depth 12 feet, northeast of Leona Avenue fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in arkosic sandstone or alluvium (Tar or Tab and QaI of Kahle, et a 1. 1975).

Los Angeles (19)

1056 Sleepy VaI ley 10/22/79 Michael V. Smith

File #78-21. 9211 Elizabeth Lake Road, Leona Valley.

One trench, maximum depth 15 feet, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979Z). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Kahle, et aj.., 1975).

County (C i ty)
of Juri sd ict ion

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP File
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Invest igating Report!s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. 1-10)

Los Angeles (20)

39 Sleepy Valley 9/21/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-21. 9715 Elizabeth Lake Road, Leona Valley.

One trench, maximum depth 15 feet, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Kahle, et a I., 1975).

Los Angeles (21)

313 Sleepy Valley 9/11/71 John 0. Nigra

Project #871-752. 8817 Elizabeth Lake Road, Leona Valley.

Four trenches, maximum depth 16 feet, across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). Trench
2: Faulting as evidenced by "marked vertical zone of demarcation placing pebbly allu-
vial interbeds, light tan in shade, against dark, organic, massive silty clay." (Qal of Kahle, et ajk , 1975).

Los Angeles (22)

Sleepy VaI ley 8/19/71 John D. MerriI I

Project #11201. NW corner 90th
St. West and Elizabeth Lake Road, Leona VaI ley.

One trench, average depth 9 feet, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Kahle, et a I.. 1975).

Los Angeles (23) 1029 Sleepy VaI ley 5/1/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7919-1. 8216 W. Calva St., Leona VaI ley.

One trench, 8 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979Z). No faulting in Holocene fan deposits (Qf of Kahle, et a I.. 1975).

Los Angeles (24) 1351 Sleepy VaI ley 6/5/81 Buena Engineers, Inc. Job #B-1858-L01. Portion of lot 9, Tract 28381, Leona
Valley.

One trench, maximum depth 7 1/2 feet, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in "older" fan deposits (Qf of Kahle, et a I.. 1975).

Los Angeles (98)

Sleepy Valley 7/28/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1815-L01

Two trenches, 5 to 13 feet deep, across and northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). Trenches 1,2: no faulting in Holocene fan deposits or alluvium.

Los Angeles (25)

Sleepy Valley 5/10/71 John D. Merrill

Project #12321. Lot 35, Tract 5118, Leona Valley.

One trench and two test pits, maximum depth 10 feet, northeast of Leona Valley fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in granite bedrock or Holocene alluvium (dgn and Qal of
Kahle, et aj_., 1975).

Los Angeles (26)

Sleepy Valley 7/7/77 John D. Merrill

Project #71072. Vicinity of 8353 Elizabeth Lake Road,
Leona VaI ley.

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in "older" fan deposits or Holocene alluvium (Qf and Qal of Kahle, et a I..
1975).

County (City)
or Juri sd ict ion

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP File
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle(s)

Date or Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County ( Figs. <4-10)

Los Angeles (27) 1516

Sleepy Valley 8/5/82 Geoplan, Inc.

Project #25812. 8555 Elizabeth Lake Road, Leona Valley.

Two trenches, 14-15 feet deep, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No
faulting in burr and red arkose, colluvium or Holocene alluvium (Tar, Tab, Qc and Qal of Kahle, et aj[., 1975).

Los Angeles (28)

Sleepy VaI ley 5/13/71 William Wa i sge rbe r and Associates

Ref. No. 1025-L-033-E. Portion of lot 18, Tract 51U8, south of Elizabeth Lake, Pine Canyon Road, east of 87th St. West, Leona Valley.

One trench, unspecified depth, northeast of Leona Avenue fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Kahle, et a|.. 1975).

Los Angeles (29) ro ro

Sleepy VaI ley 6/9/80 Michael V. Smith

File #8010-1. Tentative Minor Land Division Map #12807, Leona Valley.

Four trenches, 5-16 feet deep, across trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in burr arkosic sandstone of Pliocene Anaverde Formation or poorly consoli-
dated Holocene fan deposits (Tab and Qf of Kahle, et a_L.. 1975).

Los Angeles (30)

Sleepy VaI ley 1/26/78 John D. MerriI I

Project #8U360. Tentative PM #10233, Leona Valley.

Two trenches, 5-13 feet deep, southwest and northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in Holocene fan deposits (Qf of Kahle, et aj.. 1975).

Los Angeles (31)

Sleepy VaI ley 8/10/71 John D. MerriI I

Project #11181. Portions SE 1/U
NW 1/U and SW 1/M NE 1/U section, 16, T6N, R13W, BBM, Leona Valley.

One trench, unspecified depth, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). Intense fracturing, brecciation and siickensides, but no faulting, in ' metagranite" or over-
lying alluvial deposits (dgn and Qf or Kahle, et aj.., 1975).

Los Angeles (32)

BOM Sleepy Valley 6/29/78 John D. Merrill

Project #8M572. PM #1075U, Leona VaI ley.

One trench, 5-10 feet deep, across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in "older" alluvium (Qf or Kahle, et aj.., 1975).

Los Angeles (33)

Sleepy VaIIey 5/15/71 WiI Iiam Wa isgerber and Associates

Ref. No. 102M L 033 E. N 1/U of S 1/2 of E 1/2 of E 1/2 of
SW 1/M, of NE 1/M of section 16, T6N, R13W, SBM, Leona Valley.

One trench, maximum depth 9 feet, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). No faulting in "older" or Holocene alluvium (Qf and Qpa of Kahle, et a_l_., 1975).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrangle( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report( s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. *4-10)

Los Angeles (3U)

Sleepy VaI ley 11/14/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Project 0B-1925-L01

Three trenches, U-15 feet deep, across Leona Avenue fault (CDMG, 1979z). Trench C:
faulting and fracturing in gneiss, Pleistocene fan deposits and Holocene alluvium (pis, Qof, and Qa I of Kahle, et a_i., 1975).

Los Angeles (35)

Sleepy VaI ley 11/20/70 James E. Slosson and Associates

Kirkpatrick Property, Leona VaI ley

Two trenches, 10 feet deep, northeast of strand of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979z). Trench 1: no faulting, but "possible secondary breaks in older alluvium associated to the principal 1857 trace" of the San Andreas (Qoa of Kahle, et a I.. 1975).

Los Angeles (99 B*)

Ritter Ridge

6/10/82 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-1985-L01

Two trenches, 5 to 11 feet deep, across and southwest of north branch of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979aa). Trench 1: faulting in red arkose, buff arkose and clay shale members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation and Holocene alluvium (Tar, Tab, Tac and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (100)

1071

Ritter Ridge

9/10/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7946-1

Five trenches, 5 to 11 feet deep, across main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979aa). Trench 3: Faulting in Pleistocene Harold Formation (Qh of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). Trench U: Faulting in red arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation and older alluvium (Tar and Qoa of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). Trench 5: faulting in red arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation (Tar of Barrows,
et al.. 1976).

Los Angeles (36)

1071A Ritter Ridge

5/29/80 Michael V. Smith

File #79«»5-1. Parcel
13038, north of Avenue S, west of Tierra Subida Road.

Four trenches, 5 feet deep, across subsidiary faults southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979aa). Trench A-1: "probable" vertical faulting in older alluvium, but no faulting in overlying "residual soil" (Qoa and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). Trench A-2: Thrust or high angle reverse faulting on "pressure ridge which resulted from tectonic activity within the main San Andreas fault zone" in Pleistocene Nadeau Formation gravels (Qn of Barrows,
et aj.., 1976).

Not filed with Los Angeles County; may be consulted at Buena Engineers, U2326 10th St. West, Lancaster, Ca I i fo rn i a.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2
Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. M-10)

Los Angeles (37)

1088

Ri tter Ridge

9/10/79 Michael V. Smith

File 079M6-1, Tentative Minor Land Division No. 127M9, Palmdale.

Five trenches, 5-13 feet deep, across San Andreas and subsidiary fault (CDMG, 1979aa). Trenches 3,M,5: Faulting in red arkose of Pliocene Anaverde Formation, Pleistocene Harold Formation and older alluvium (Tar, Qh and Qoa of Barrows,
et a I.. 1976). Surface expressions of recent faulting, as "closed depressions, troughs, offset drainage, shatter ridges and ponded alluvium" observed on site. Apparent offsets in Holocene alluvium observed in immediate vicinity of site (Qal of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (38)

Ritter Ridge

7/17/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7932-1. Tentative Tract Map 37502, Palmdale,

Two trenches and six test pits, 6-13 feet deep, across trace of unnamed fault (Nadeau fault ?) southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979aa). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (39)

Ri tter Ridge

5/73 Supple-
ment: 7/25/73

Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B3-1200-L01, Tract No. 29313, Palmdale.

One trench, 6-1U feet deep, across Nadeau fault (CDMG, 1979aa). No faulting in fanglomerate or alluvium (Qof (?) or Qoa (?) and Qal of Barrows, et a I..
1976).

Los Angeles

Ritter Ridge

8/77

Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-H4I48-L01, 36305 El Camino Drive, Pa Imda I e

One trench, 6-12 feet deep, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979aa). No faulting in quartz monzonite bedrock or Holocene alluvium (gn (?) and Qal of
Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Palmdale

(1)

Palmdale

8/2U/79 Michael V. Smith

File 079U8-1

Nine trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, across Cemetery fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Trench 1: faults placing buff arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation against older alluvium (Tab and Qoa of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). Trench 2: shearing and faulting in buff arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation; faulting in older alluvium (Tab and Qoa of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). Trench 8: faulting in older alluvium, but no faulting in overlying Holocene alluvium
(Qoa and Qal of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Palmdale

(2)

Pa Imda le

1/13/81 Michael V. Smith

File 080UM-1

Three trenches, 5 to 12 feet deep, across projected trace of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Trench 3: faulting in buff arkose and clay shale members of Pliocene Anaverde Formation. No faulting in overlying older alluvium (Tab, Tac
and Qoa of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le Numbe r

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. U-10)

Los Angeles (U1 )

Palmdale

2/11/7U Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #BU-1271-L01,
Antelope Valley Press Property, 1U50 feet north of Avenue "S" between Sierra Hwy. and Tenth Street East, PaImdale

One trench, 2-9 feet deep, northeast of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No shear zones or faulting in Pliocene Anaverde Formation or Holocene alluvium (Ta and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (U2)

320 PaImdale

8/214/76 Moore and Taber

Job #1176-506, Palmdale General Hospital, 1215 E, Avenue "S", Palmdale

One trench, U-5 feet deep, across trace of fault northeast and parallel to Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Faulting, shearing, siickenslides and gouge
in pink to light gray arkosic sandstones of the Pliocene Anaverde Formation fo and overlying Holocene alluvium (Tab and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (U3)

576 PaImdale

6/2/77 Lamar-Mer i field

Job 0PAL-U, Tract 31919, Lot 8

Ten test pits, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of Cemetery fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in granitic bedrock or overlying Holocene colluvium (gr and Qsw of Barows, et a I .. 1976).

Los Angeles (101 B*)

PaImdale

12/13/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7956-1

Twelve trenches, 3 to 7 feet deep, across Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Faulting, with at least nine significant faults, in red arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation, "older alluvium and colluvium" (Tar, Qsw of Barrows,
et al.. 1976).

Los Angeles (102)

PaImdale

5/8/80 Michael V. Smith

File #7972-2

Two trenches, 5 feet deep, across Littlerock and subsidiary faults (CDMG, 1979bb). Trench 1: red arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation in fault contact with Pleistocene Nadeau gravel and Holocene alluvium (Tar, Qn and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). Another fault present placing Harold Formation (Pelona Senistbearing mem-
ber) against Pleistocene Nadeau Gravel (Qhp and Qn of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (103 B*)

Pa Imda I e

10/26/79 Michael V. Smith

File £7949-1

Two trenches, maximum depth 5 feet, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Trench 1: Faulting and fracturing in "buff arkose" member of
Pliocene Anaverde Formation (Tar of Barrows, et a I., 1976).

* Not filed with Los Angeles County; may be consulted at Buena Engineers, U2326 10th St. West, Lancaster, CaIi fornia.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. 4-101

Los Angeles (44) 1373 PaImda le

8/28/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-20, 36222 32nd St. East, PaImdale

Two trenches, 2 1/2 - 5 feet deep, across projected trace of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Trench 1: faulting in arkpsic sandstone* of Pliocene Anaverde Formation, but no faulting in overlying Pleistocene Nadeau Formation gravels (Ta and Qn of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (45)

Pa Imda I e

3/25/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1831-L01, Tax Parcels 3052-18-5 and 3-52-18-6, PaImda le

Three trenches, 3-6 feet deep, across Littlerpck fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Trenches 1,2: Red arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation in fault contact with Pleistocene Nadeau sandy gravels (Tar and Qn of Barrows, e t a I.. 1976). Trench 3: Fracturing, but no apparent faulting in Anaverde Formation (Ta of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (46)

914 PaImda le

11/21/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-35, 3401 Ave T-6 East,

PaImdale

ro

ON One trench, maximum depth 8 feet, southwest of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb).

No faulting in Pliocene Anaverde Formation or Holocene alluvium (Tar and QaI of

Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles

PaImda le

2/8/71 Robert Stone and Associates, Inc.

Job #1-0-0170-02. Tract 26272, Old Nadeau Road, PaImdale.

Thirty-nine trenches, maximum depth 15 feet, across Nadeau and subsidiary faults (CDMG, 1979bb). Trenches 2,13,17,27,28,34,36,37,38,39: shearing and faulting with up to 18 inches offset in Pliocene Punchbowl Formation and older alluvium (Tjh and Qoa of Barrows, ejt aj... 1976).

Los Angeles (48) 1439 PaImdale

1/26/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7904-1, Tax Parcel 305217-7, 3315 Ave T-8, East Palmda le

One trench, maximum depth 8 feet, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in slope wash or Holocene alluvium (Qsw and QaI of Barrows, et al.. 1976).

Los Angeles (49)

913 PaImdale

1/24/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7902-1

Two trenches, maximum depth 3 1/2 feet, north of Littlerock fault (CMDG, 1979bb). Trenches 1-2: no faulting in basement granite or Holocene alluvium (gr and
QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (104)

913 PaImdale

1/24/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7902-1, Tract No. 12275, PaImdale

Two trenches, 2 - 3-1/2 feet deep, northeast of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in granitic bedrock or overlying Holocene alluvium (gr and Qa I of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

County (City)
of Juri sd iction

County (City) Fi le Numbe r

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. U-10)

Los Angeles (105 B*)

PaImda le

6/2/81 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #1860-L01

One trench, 5 to 6 feet deep, across trace of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Faulting in red arkose member of Pliocene Anaverde Formation, older alluvium and Holocene alluvium (Tar, Qoa and QaI of Barrows, eta I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (106) 1072 PaImdale

10/16/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7916-1

Seven trenches, 5 feet deep, across Nadeau fault.(CDMG, 1979bb). Trench 5: normal faulting with a minimum of two feet of displacement in lake and undifferentiated deposits of Pleistocene Harold Formation but no faulting in overlying older fan deposits (Qhl, Qh and Qof of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (50)

PaImdale

8/1/77 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job 0B-1454-L01 Ave. T-4 and 36th St. East, PaImdale

One trench, 8 feet deep, northeast of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in gravelly sands (Nadeau Formation ?) or "sandy silts" (Holocene alluvium ?) (Qn and Qa I of Barrows, et a I . . 1976).

Los Angeles (51)

924 Pa I mda I e

7/26/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-17, 3540 Ave. T-6

East, Pa I mda I e

One trench, 5 feet deep, southwest of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting

in Pliocene Anaverde Formation or Holocene alluvium (Tar and QaI of Barrows, et a I..

1976).

Los Angeles (52) 1267 PaImdale

10/30/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7953-1, 3744 Ave. T-8 East, Pa ImdaIe

One trench, 6 feet deep, northeast of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Possible faulting in buff arkose of Pliocene Anaverde Formation, but no faulting in older or Holocene alluvium (Tab, Qoa and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (53) 1027 PaImdale

8/14/79 Michael V. Smith

File #7943-1, 36U7 Ave T-8 East, PaImdale

One trench, 5 feet deep, southwest of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in Pliocene Anaverde Formation or Holocene alluvium (Tar and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (54) 1453 PaImdale

4/2/82 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-1967-L01, Tract No. 13U35

Five trenches, 4-6 feet deep, across trace of Littlerock and subsidiary faults (CDMG, 1979bb). Numerous faults, gouge and shear zones in Pliocene Anaverde Formation and older alluvium (Tar and Qoa of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

* Not filed with Los Angeles County; may be consulted at Buena Engineers, 42326 10th St. West, Lancaster, Ca I i fornia .

County (City)
or Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geologi st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County (Figs. U-10)

Los Angeles (55)

1039

PaImda le

11/13/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-33, 3822 Ave. T-8 East, Palmdale

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, northeast of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in Pliocene Anaverde Formation or overlying older alluvium (Ta and Qoa of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (56)

Pa Imda I e

3/19/80 Michael V. Smith

File #8005-1, Tax Parcel No.
3052-25-9, 35848 UOth St. East, PaImdale

Three trenches, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Trenches 1-3: Normal faulting and fault gouge in red arkose of Pliocene Anaverde Formation and older alluvium (Tar and Qoa of Barrows, et a I .. 1976).

Los Angeles (57) 1026 PaImdale

10/11/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-26, 35808 «l2nd St. East, PaImdale

One trench, U-8 feet deep, southwest of Littlerock fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No

oIso)

faulting in red arkosic unit of Pliocene Anaverde Formation (Tar of Barrows, et al.. 1976).

Los Angeles (58)

PaImdale

7/23/71 John 0. Nigra

Project #177-6U2, 1310 Palmdale Hills Drive, Palmdale

Three trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in Pleistocene fanglomerate or overlying sandy clay (Qn and Qhl or Qhp of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (59)

809 Pa ImdaIe

6/26/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-11, East side of AlIda Lane, 100 feet north of Palmdale Hills Estates.

One trench, 6 1/2 feet deep, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Folding but no faulting in Pliocene Upper Anaverde Formation (Tac of
Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (60)

837 PaImdale

1/2/78 Michael V. Smith

File #78-U, Parcel 11, northwest corner of Palmdale Hills Drive and Alida Lane in Palm-
dale Hills Estates

One trench, maximum depth 8 1/2 feet, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in Pleistocene siltstone and sandstones
(Qhp of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (61)

PaImdale

3/3/78 John 0 Nigra

Project #278-912, 35532 Alida Lane, Palmdale

Three trenches, average depth 6 feet, adjacent to trace of subsidiary fault northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No evidence of faulting in
Pleistocene conglomerate (Qn or Qhp of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) File Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2
Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Angeles County [Figs. U-10)

Los Angeles (62)

PaImdale

8/16/71 John 0. Nigra

Project #178-6*45, Lot 6 at Alida Lane, PaImdale

Four trenches, maximum depth 13 feet, across trace of subsidiary fault northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). Trenches 1-U: Faulting and gouge zones in macerated granitic bedrock (gr of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). No faulting in overlying Pelona Schist derived conglomerate (Qn (?) of Barrows, et a I.. 1976). Ex-
tension of the fault line, as determined by trenching, to outcrop shows Pleistocene terrace conglomerate faulted against light-colored igneous rock (Qhp, Qn (?) and gr of Barrows, et a I.. 1976).

Los Angeles (63)

PaImdale

6/2/80 Michael V. Smith

File #7916-3. Wesleyan Hills Property, Tentative Tract No. «4011«4.

Four trenches. 3-5 feet deep, across main trace of San Andreas and subsidiary faults

(CDMG, 1979bb). Trench 1: shearing and faulting in lake deposits of upper Pleis-

tocene Harold Formation and older alluvium (Qhl and Qoa of Barrows, et aj. 1976).

Trench 2: Faults placing undifferentiated member and lake deposits of upper Pleis-

\too

tocene Harold Formation against older alluvium (Qh, Qhl and Qoa of Barrows, et a I. 1976). Trenches 3,*4: faulting in Pleistocene boulder gravels and older alluvium

(Qbg and Qoa of Barrows, et a 1. 1976).

Los Angeles (6U) 1157 PaImdale

3/25/80 Michael V. Smith

File #8008-1, 5630 Barrel Springs Road, PaImdale

Los Angeles (65)

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979bb). No faulting in Pleistocene Harold Formation or Holocene alluvium
(Qhg and QaI of Barrows, et aj. 1976).

Li ttlerock

U/30/80 Michael V. Smith

File #7916-2. Pa I ma i re Properties Ltd., Tentative Tract
No. M0113.

Five trenches, 3-6 feet deep, across trace of Littlerock fault or southeastern extension of Cemetery fault (CDMG, 197«4ff). Trench 1: "probable faulting in Holocene fan deposits" (Qsw of Barrows, 1979a). Trench 2,3,U: faulting, shearing, jointing
and offset aplite dike in granite (hqm of Barrows, 1979a).

Los Angeles (66)

Juniper Hills U/26/7U John D. Merrill

Project #142293, Parcel Map 4072, South 106th Street East, Vicinity of Littlerock

Three trenches, unspecified depth, across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Ucc). Trenches 1,2: faulting in granitic and metamorphic bedrock and overlying
Holocene alluvium (qd and QaI of Barrows, 1979a).

Los Angeles (107)

Va I ye rmo

2/21/80 Michael V. Smith

File #7969-1

Two trenches, 5 to 6 feet deep, across subsidiary fault northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197«4s). Trenches 1,2: faulting in Holocene alluvium
(Qal of Barrows, 1979b).

County (City)
of
Jurisdiction

County (City)
File
Number

CDMG AP
File
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Invest i gat ing Report ( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Anqeles County (Figs. 4-10)

Michael V. Smith

File #8024-1. Tentative PM

Los Angeles (68) Los Angeles (69) Los Angeles (70) Los Angeles (71)
Los Angeles (72) Los Angeles (73)

Four trenches, 5-9 feet deep, south of Ho I comb fault (CDMG, 1974s). No fau11 i ng in Holocene colluvium or alluvium (Qsw and QaI of Barrows, 1979b).

1317 VaI ye rmo

3/27/80 Michael V. Smith

File #8006-1. 17300 Big Pines Hwy, VaI yermo.

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG,
1974s). No faulting in "older" fan deposits or Holocene colluvium (Qsw (?) and QaI of Barrows, 1979b).

1178 VaI ye rmo

4/22/80 Allan E. Seward

Job #0-257-6. 17610 Big Pines Hwy, VaIyermo.

Three trenches, maximum depth 8 1/2 feet, northeast of main trace of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974s). Trenches 1-3: Fracturing, but no faulting in older alluvium (Qoa of Barrows, 1979b).

1230 Mesca I Creek 9/10/80 Michael V. Smith

File #8028-1. Harmony Pines Camp, Wrightwood.

One trench, 7 feet deep, northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974dd). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1967).

MescaI Creek

1/20/81 RyI a nd-Cumm i ng s, Inc.

Project #80-27-03. Mount Kare Camp, Wrightwood.

Four trenches, 6-8 feet deep, across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974dd). Trench 1 excavated across prominent trough created by erosion along San Andreas. The "change in stratification of alluvium and crushed granite bedrock" used as evi-
dence for presence of fault (pGc and Qal of Rogers, 1967). Trenches 3,4: gouge and shear zones in fractured granite bedrock, but no faulting in Holocene
alluvium (pCe and Qal of Rogers, 1967).

143 MescaI Creek 8/1/75 Richard G. Mead

Mount Kare Camp, Wrightwood

One trench, 12-14 feet deep, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974dd). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1967).

147 MescaI Creek 8/15/75 Earl R. Morley, Jr.

Project #440-85. Camp Commerce, Wrightwood.

Three trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974dd). Trench 1: "rock flour, presence of badly oxidized orange-brown clay, silt fault gouge and siickenslided mylonite greenschist" stated as evidence for faulting in greenschist bedrock (?) (m of Rogers, 1967). Trenches 2,3: fracturing and
shearing in granite gneiss (pCc of Rogers, 1967).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP 7-1/2 Fi le Minute Number Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. Los Anqeles County (Fiqs. 14 -10)

Los Angeles (7«4)

579 Mount San Antonio

7/28/77 Pioneer Consultants

Job #2723-001. Hoi iday Hill Ski Lift, Wrightwood.

Three trenches, 10-13 feet deep, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uee). No faulting in Holocene al luvium (Qal of Rogers, 1967).

Los Angeles (75) 1U02 Mount San Antonio

7/29/81 Alien E . Sewa rd

Job /(M-289-U. Tentative Tract No. U1777. Wrightwood.

Forty-six trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uee). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1967).

,0*
F1g. 10 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault between Uttlerock and Telegraph Peak areas by Los Angeles and San Bernardino County numbers. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.
to
Branch South Branch
Fig. 11 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault between Devore and San Gorgonio Mountain areas by San Bernardino County and City (*) numbers. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

45^ > %**%¥<-- v1 $ feM ^ l^^v^RM^
',-«^; ,/)^;A^>K'.^,,(^':y^^^rl^^goi*f:^;-
/Vfv : > ...- V-.,- '-? -^ ot i*Tv~?v^ .
^fe^saRS^
U)
Fig. 12 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault in western San Bernardino area by San Bemardino County and City (*) numbers. See Fig. 11 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols

u>
Fig. 13 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Andreas fault 1n eastern San Bemardino area by San Bernard)no County and City (*) numbers. See Fig. 11 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP 7-1/2 Fi le Minute Number Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) GeoIog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernard I no County (Figs. 10-1U1

San Bernardino (1) 1U9

Mount San Antonio

10/10/71 R.G. Mead

Tract No. 5383

Trench up to 9 feet deep northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uee), no faulting in soil and alluvium.

San Bernardino

(2)

91

Mount San

Antonio

10/17/7U R.G. Mead

Tract No. 2UOO

Trench, average depth 10 feet, directly northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uee), no faulting in soil and talus.

(San Bernardino) (3*)

6U9

Devore

11/15/77 G.A. Clopine 02/17/81

Lake Devore Mobile Home Estates

Trench, average depth 10 feet, across Tokay Hill fault (CDMG, 197Umm), faulting in "Quaternary older alluvium."

(San Bernardino) (5*) 1507

Devore

7/17/81 Gary S. Rasmussen

to

San Bernardino North

and Associates

Project #1738-2

Trenches, average depth 10 feet, across strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Umm,nn), faults 1 foot wide in older alluvium, 3 feet vertical offset.

(San Bernardino) (6*) 1U98

San Bernardino 11/19/80 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1639-2

Cuts and trenches across strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), gouge and fractures in granite and alluvium "as old as mid-Pleistocene."

(San Bernardino) (7*) 1096

San Bernardino 1/28/80 Leighton and

North

Assoc iates

Project #679662-01

Trench up to 11 feet deep south of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting i n Ho Iocene a I Iuv i urn.

(San Bernardino) (8*) 1020

San Bernardino 8/1/79 G.A. Clopine North

6080 State Highway 18

Trenches, 5 feet deep, across North Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197*»nn), Ho Iocene alluvium faulted against quartz monzonite.

(San Bernardino) (9*) 6U7

San Bernardino 1/1/78 G.A. Clopine

North

3/19/78

6/2U/78

Tracts 1019U, 10258, and 10259

Trenches up to 12.5 feet deep across San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), 2 feet wide crushed and sheared zone in alluvium.

County
(City) of
Jurisdiction

County
(City) File
Number

CDMG AP
File
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of
Report ( s) (Mo/da/yr)

Investigating F i rm or Geo I og i s t

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernard ino County (Fiqs. 10-1U)

(San Bernard ino) (10*) 531

San Bernard ino 1/7/77
North

C. Price

Area No. U11 717-3

Two trenches to depths of 8 feet directly northeast and on San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn). "Shear zone" and "disturbed zone of sandstone and reddish
brown siIty sand" in Potatoe sandstone; not clear from report whether younger units (Recent alluvium and Pleistocene silty sand) are faulted.

(San Bernardino) (11*) 529

San Bernardino 1/17/77 G.A. Clopine North

North end of E and F Streets

Three trenches and 2 pits within and southwest of San Andreas fault zone (CDMG, 197Unn), faults cut old alluvium and place older alluvium against Potatoe sand-
stone within 3.5 and 2.5 feet of surface. "Old alluvium" includes dark gray to black
clay, "probably represents sag pond material".

(San Bernardino) (12*) 22U

San Bernardino 12/U/75 G.A. Clopine North

Mayfield Ave. between 58th and 59th Streets.

u>

Two trenches to a maximum depth of 12.5 feet in unfaulted and unfractured alluvium resting on fractured Potatoe sandstone directly northeast of San

Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn); no faulting.

(San Bernardino) (13*) 657

San Bernardino 6/3/77 G.A. Clopine North

Pa rce I U6

Trench up to 8 feet deep located between strands of San Andreas fault zone (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Potatoe sandstone overlain by Holocene allu-
vium.

(San Bernardino) (1U*) 1U89

San Bernardino 9/11/79 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project

Trench up to 8 feet deep between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene alluvium overlying Potatoe sandstone.

(San Bernardino) (15*) 6U5

San Bernardino 6/2/77 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1201

Four trenches up to 11.5 feet deep across two strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), faulting of Holocene alluvium within 1.5 feet of surface.

(San Bernardino) (16*) 223

San Bernardino 7/7/75 F.A. Fleming North

5Uth Street near Sepulveda Avenue.

Three trenches to depths of 10 to 1U feet in alluvium, directly northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no evidence of faulting.

(San Bernardino) (17*) 656

San Bernardino 1/19/77 C. Price North

Lot 9, Block 15U, page 6, S.B. Co.

Trenches up to 9 feet deep southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in alluvium.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City)
Fi le Number

COMG
AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle( s)

Date of Report( s) (Mo/da/yr)

Investigating Fi rm or Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernard!no County (Figs. 10-1U1

(San Bernardino) (18*) 863

San Bernardino 5/U/78
North

Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1332

Trench up to 10 feet deep southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (19*) 637

San Bernardino 8/19/77 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1235

(San Bernardino) (20*) 866 (San Bernardino) (21») 109U (San Bernardino) (22») 1089 (San Bernardino) (23*) 108«4 (San Bernardino) (2U*) 1090 (San Bernardino) (25*) 268

Trench up to 11 feet deep located 150 feet southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino 3/9/78 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #130«4

Trench up to 11 feet deep southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino 8/9/78 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1358

Trenches up to 11 feet deep southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino 9/12/77 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1233

Trenches across strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), faulting in Holocene a Iluvium.

San Bernardino 8/1/78 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1377

Trenches up to 11 feet deep across strand of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), "probably late Pleistocene" terrace deposits faulted against Potatoe sandstone.

San Bernardino 8/2/79 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1506

Trenches and cuts across strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), faulting in metamorphic rocks and "probably late Pleistocene" terrace deposits.

San Bernardino 5/20/76 G.A. CI opine North

Bonita Vista Drive at Quail Canyon Road

Two trenches to maximum depth of 13.5 feet in "red arkosic older alluvium" between two strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting.

County
(City) of
Jurisd iction

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP File
Number

7-1/2
Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernard! no County (Fiqs. 10-1U)

(San Bernard! no) (26*) 638

San Bernard! no 5/20/76 G.A. Clopine

North

11/10/77

Bonita Vista Drive at Quail Canyon Road

Pit and trench between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn) up to

11.75 feet deep, no faulting in older alluvium.

'

(San Bernardino) (27*) 655

San Bernardino 6/2U/77 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1212

Trench up to 11 feet deep across strand of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino (28)

712

San Bernardino U/17/78 Gary S. Rasmusser.

North

U/19/78 and Associates

Project #1336

Trenches up to 11 feet deep southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino (29)

929

San Bernardino 9/18/78 Gary S. Rasmussen

North

and Associates

Project #1U05

oo Trenches southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting in Holocene a Iluvium.

(San Bernardino) (30*) 1505

Harrison Mtn. 12/30/81 G.A. Clopine

Chiquita Lane

Trench, 9.5-10 feet deep, north of North Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in late Pleistocene and Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (31*) 6U8

Harrison Mtn. 12/9/77 G.A. Clopine

Tract No. 10220

Trenches across North Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), Potatoe sandstone faulted against Pleistocene older alluvium; 6 feet wide zone which extends to within
1 foot of surface.

(San Bernardino) (32*) 527

Harrison Mtn. 10/22/76 G.A. Clopine

170U Bonita Vista Drive.

Trenches, maximum depth 1M feet, between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in "late Pleistocene older alluvium".

(San Bernardino) (33*) 1U88

Harrison Mtn.

09/7/79 G.A. Clopine 3/18/80

Echo Drive

Trenches, 10-15 feet deep, between branches of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in Quaternary alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (3U*) 218

Harrison Mtn. 11/30/7U G.A. Clopine

Osbun Road

Trenches, 9 to 13 feet deep, between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in "older alluvium of late Pleistocene age" and "sag pond (lake) deposits ,

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
File
Number

CDMG AP File
Number

7-1/2
Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernard i no County (Figs. 10-1U)

(San Bernard!no) (35*) 1083

Harrison Mtn.

8/10/78 Geo-Sec, Home, Chance and Associates

Project #332

Trenches, maximum depth 15 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), faulting in alluvium.

(San Bernard?no) (36*) 530

Harrison Mtn. 3/2/77 G.A. Clopine

1800 block E. Mesa Drive.

Trench, 1U to 16 feet deep, between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in late Pleistocene older alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (37*) 561

Harrison Mtn. 12/12/77 G.A. Clopine

Vie. of 1900 Mesa Verde Drive

Trench, average depth 13 feet, between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), faulting in "older alluvium" overlain by unfaulted "younger alluvium .

(San Bernardino) (38*) 1U93 Harri son Mtn. 3/28/77 G.A. Clopine

Lot 35, Tract 5659

vo
Trench, 11 feet deep, north of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo),

no faulting in older alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (39*) 1085

Harri son Mtn. 8/7/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1387

Trenches, average depth 10 feet, across North Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), late Pleistocene terrace deposits faulted against Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (UO*) 635 Harrison Mtn. 6/10/77 G.A. Clopine

Hemlock and WiI low Drive

Two trenches, average depth 8 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), late Pleistocene older alluvium faulted against Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard I no) (U1*) 217

Harrison Mtn. 9/21/74 G.A. Clopine

Tract 85U5

Trenches, 9 to 16 feet deep, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard ino) (U2*) 869

Harrison Mtn.

5/20/78 Geo-Sec, Home, Chance and Assoc iates

Project #331

Trenches, average depth 10 feet, directly southwest of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP 7-1/2 File Minute Number Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernard! no County (Fiqs. 10-14)

(San Bernard! no) (43*) 650

Harrison Mtn. 04/8/77 Gary S. Rasmussen 6/20/77 and Associates

Project #1185

Trenches, average depth 11 feet, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (44*) 868

Harrison Mtn. 10/12/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1403

Trenches, average depth 11 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (15*) 653

Harrison Mtn. 8/2/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1109-3

Trenches, average depth 12 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), two major traces, approximately 120 feet apart, rupture older alluvium to within 6 inches of surface. "Carbon 14 sample indicated in "wet organic clay" 9 feet below surface adjacent to fault zone. No data on sample in report.

(San Bernard)no) (46*) 646 Harrison Mtn. 10/77 C. Price

Area No. 409 713-1

Trenches, 10 to 15 feet deep, south of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), no faulting in Pleistocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (47*) 221

Harrison Mtn. 1/21/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1083

Trenches, average depth 10 feet, southwest of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (48*) 528

Harrison Mtn. 2/18/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1176

Trenches, 10 to 15 feet deep, across strand of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), faulting in sandstone and conglomerate of Potatoe Formation.

(San Bernard I no) (49*) 524

Harrison Mtn. 3/19/74 Gary S. Rasmussen 9/10/76 and Associates

Project #1016-3

Trenches northeast of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), no active traces in alluvium, terrace deposits, and conglomerate of Potatoe Formation.

(San Bernard!no) (50*) 1495

Harrison Mtn. 7/17/80 Geological Systems Evaluation Co.

Project #334

Trenches, 4 feet deep, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), faulting in a Iluvium.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Numbe r

CDMG AP 7-1/2 File Minute Number Quadrangle( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernardino County (Figs. 10-1U)

(San Bernardino) (51*) 222

Harrison Mtn. 06/24/75 Leighton and 10/20/77 Associates

Project #GU256-2

Trenches between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no evidence of recent faulting in conglomerate of Potatoe Formation, "less prominent fault in Potatoe Formation."

(San Bernardino) (52*) 651

Harrison Mtn.

7/22/77 Leighton and
Associates

Project #77219-1

Trench directly southwest of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in Pleistocene alluvium.

San Bernardino

(53) 891

Harrison Mtn. 8/30/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1388

Trenches, minimum depth 10 feet, between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in older alluvium.

San Bernardino

(5U)

90

Harrison Mtn. 2/3/75 G.A. CI opine

Lot 47, Tract 5299

Two trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, between strands of San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), no faulting in "late Pleistocene older alluvium".

San Bernardino

(55) 709

Harrison Mtn. ti/14/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1318

Trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino

(56) 668

Harrison Mtn. 12/19/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1082-2

Trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo); faulting in Holocene alluvium and sag pond deposits.

San Bernardino

(57) 601

Harrison Mtn. 12/21/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1280

Trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), and "additional buried and inactive faults"; fault displacement in Holocene alluvium and mid-late Pleistocene terrace deposits.

(San Bernardino) (58*) 862

Harrison Mtn

2/8/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1301-2

Trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, across North and South Branches San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Uoo), faulting in late Pleistocene terrace deposits resting on Potatoe sandstone and metamorphic rocks.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernardino County (Figs. 1Q-1U)

San Bernardino (59) 625

Harrison Mtn., 1/10/78 Gary S. Rasmussen

Red lands

and Associates

Project #1281

Trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, across South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG,
1974oo), and "buried inactive fault"; faulting in Holocene alluvium and sag pond deposits.

San Bernardino (60) 63U

Harrison Mtn., 1/24/78 Gary S. Rasmussen

Red lands

and Associates

Project #1295

Trench, 11 feet minimum depth, southwest of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974oo), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino (61) 890

Yuca i pa

12/11/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1063-3

Trenches, 10 to 15 feet deep, across South Branch San Andreas fault and associated thrust faults (CDMG, 1979ss), 110 feet wide fault zone across San Andreas fault and other faults in Holocene alluvium.

NJ

San Bernardino (62) 660

Yuca i pa

2/3/78 Gary S. Rasmussen 2/14/78 and Associates

Project #1239-2

Trenches, average depth 10 feet, southwest of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979ss), faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino (63) 930

Yuca i pa

10/20/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1400

Trenches, average depth 10 feet, southwest of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979ss), no faulting in Holocene allluvium.

San Bernardino

(6U)

53

Yuca ipa

10/27/74 Lewis S. Lohr
9/17/77 1/18/78

Job #2-74-10 Job #36-77-9

Trenches, average depth 6 feet, directly between strands of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1979ss), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino (65) 1448

SW1/4 San Gorgonio Mtn.

4/19/82 Leighton and Associates

Project #6810707-01

Trenches, 11 to 13 feet deep, northeast of strand of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Upp), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino (66) 987

SW1/4 San Gorgonio Mtn.

6/26/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1365

Trench, 10 to 12 feet deep, northeast of strand of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 1974pp), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG
AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang I e( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog ist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Andreas Fault. San Bernardino County (Fiqs. 10-14)

San Bernardino (67) 624

SW1/U San Gorgonio Mtn.

1/30/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Oak Glen Pines Camp

Trench, average depth 10 feet, southwest of South Branch San Andreas fault (CDMG, 197Upp), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino (68) 37U

SE1/U Morongo Valley

6/17/75 Converse-Davis12/10/76 Dixon Associates

Project #75-102-28

Two trenches up to 12 feet northwest of Morongo Valley fault (CDMG, 197Uq), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

Fig. 14 - Locations of engineering geology reports along Mission Creek and Morongo Valley faults between San Gorgonio Mountain and Seven Palms Valley areas by San Bernardino and Riverside County numbers. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

s /\ \ X** *"'
\>\V>'~-Ui X\ \ ^y '' </S^~y^^

SCALE

1 MILE 1 KILOMETER

Fig. 15 - Locations of engineering geology reports along Mission Creek fault by City of Desert Hot Springs number. See Fig. 14 for
location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County (City)
of
Jurisdiction

County (City)
File
Number

CDMG AP File
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rang I e( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Firm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Mission Creek and Associated Faults. Riverside County (Fiqs. 14 and 15):

Riverside

12 R 626

Seven Palms Valley

11/21/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1255

Six trenches, 10-11 feet deep, across and southwest of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980n). Trenches 1,3,4: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

51 271

Seven Palms Val ley

6/29/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #12-76-6

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1974n). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

96 599

Seven Palms Val ley

10/16/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #1*0-77-10

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1974n). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

152-R 980

Seven Palms Valley

4/17/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1473

Five trenches, 10-12 feet deep, across and northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980n) Trenches 1,2,5: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 155 916

Seven Palms Valley

1/12/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1432

Two trenches, 10-12 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1974n). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 156 922

Seven Palms Valley

1/18/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1430

Three trenches, 10-12 feet deep, across Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980n). Trenches 1,3: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965). Trench 2: faulting in late
Pleistocene units and Holocene alluvium (Qc and Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 157 921

Seven Palms Valley

1/15/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1412-2

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, across Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980n). Faulting, with 1 inch vertical offset, in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 172 979

Seven Palms Valley

4/24/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1466

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1974n). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) File Number

CDMG AP File Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrangle( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Firm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Mission Creek and Associated Faults, Riverside County (Fiqs. 1U and 15):

Riverside

208 1161

Desert Hot Springs

2/2/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #81-80-M

Three trenches, 10 feet deep, across Mission Creek and White House Canyon faults (CDMG, 1980o). Trench 1: Fault with maximum displacement of 2.0 feet for White House Canyon fault and 2.8 feet for Mission Creek fault in Pleistocene fanglomerate and Holocene alluvium. Trench 2: Mission Creek
fault displaces Pleistocene fanglomerate and Holocene alluvium. Trench 3: Mission Creek fault displaces Pleistocene fanglomerate (Qc and Qa 1 of Rogers,
1965).

Riverside 213 1265

Desert Hot Springs

1/11/80 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-10857-P1

Two trenches, 10 feet deep, northeast of San Andreas (Banning) fault (CDMG, 1980o). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 2«47 1U08

Morongo Valley 5/22/81 Leighton and

SvEu 1/U and SW

Associates, Inc.

Project #6790U«4«4-05

Twenty-two trenches, 5-15 feet deep, across Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 197Uq,r). Trenches 1 , 3, U, 5, 6, 7,25,26,27,28, 30, 31 , 32, 33, 35, 36, 37: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

265 1U67

Seven Palms Valley

12/1U/81 Southern California
Soil and Testing, Inc.

Job #19*423

One trench, 10 feet deep, northwest of Fun Valley fault (CDMG, 1980n). Possible faulting in Ocotillo conglomerate, but no faulting in overlying Holocene alluvial
and aeolian deposits (Qc (?) and Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot ( 1 ) 95 Desert Hot

Springs

Springs

M/30/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1099

Two trenches, 8 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). No faulting in Holocene fan deposits (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (2) Springs

711

Desert Hot Springs

1/13/78 Buena Engineers, Inc.

Job #B-9105-P1

One trench, 12 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

No

Desert Hot (3) Springs

999

Desert Hot Springs

6/25/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1502

One trench, maximum depth 13 feet, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of
Juri sdict ion

County (City) File
Number

CDMG AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Firm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Mission Creek and Associated Faults, Riverside County (Fiqs. 14 and 15):

Desert Hot («*) 1098 Springs

Desert Hot Springs

1/28/80 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #15MO

One trench, 11 to 15 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (5) 1099 Springs

Desert Hot Springs

5/22/70 Southern California Soil and Testing, Inc.

Job #1895**

One trench, average depth 10 feet, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). Fracturing, but no faulting in Holocene alluvium and aeolian deposits (Qal of
Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (6) Springs

835

Desert Hot Springs

2/2/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1289

Two trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG,

1980o). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

p*

oo

Desert Hot (7)

998

Desert Hot

7/2/79 Gary S. Rasmussen

Project #1M93

Springs

Springs

and Associates

Six trenches, average depth 13 feet, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (8) Springs

1M1

Desert Hot Springs

4/2U/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1100

One trench, maximum depth 10 feet, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDGM, 1980o). No faulting in Holocene alluvial fan deposits (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot Springs

(9)

834

Desert Hot Springs

8/31/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1393

One trench, 11 feet deep, southwest of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980O). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (10) Springs

597

Desert Hot Springs

8/16/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1230

Two trenches, average depth 10 feet, across Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). Trench 2: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (11) Springs

1001

Desert Hot Springs

8/6/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1523

One trench, 10 to 12 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). Fracturing, but no faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of
Jurisdiction

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang I e( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Firm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Mission Creek and Associated Faults, Riverside County (Fiqs. 1U and 15):

Desert Hot (12) Springs

881

Desert Hot Springs

9/8/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1391

Two trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, southwest of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (13) Sp r i ng s

572

Desert Hot Springs

3/31/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1186

One trench, average depth 10 feet, southwest of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980o), No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (1*0 Springs

188

Seven Palms Valley

1/29/76 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1125

Four trenches, average depth 10 feet, across Miracle Hill fault (CDMG, 1980n). No faulting in Holocene fan deposits (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (15) Springs

833

Seven Palms Valley

8/2U/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1383

Two trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, northeast of Miracle Hill fault (CDMG, 1980n). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (16) Springs

623

Seven Palms Valley

7/26/76 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1152

Two trenches, 10 to 11 feet deep, northeast of Mission Creek fault (CDMG, 1980n). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (17) Springs

571

Seven Palms Valley

12/10/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1120

Two trenches, average depth 10 feet, northeast of Mission Hill fault (CDMG, 1980n). No faulting in Holocene fan deposits (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (18) Springs

923

Seven Palms Valley

6/15/76 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1129

Two trenches, maximum depth 11 feet, northeast of Mission Hill fault (CDMG, 1980n). No faulting in Holocene fan deposits (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Desert Hot (19) Springs

908

Seven Palms Valley

11/2/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1263

One trench, maximum depth 12 feet, northeast of Miracle Hill fault (CDMG, 1980n). Caliche-filled fractures but no faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of
Rogers, 1965).

Fig. 16 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto fault zone between Telegraph Peak and San Bemardino areas by San Bernardino County, City (*) and City of Rial to (R) numbers. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

Ul
Fig. 17 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto fault zone in Col ton area by San Bernardino County and City of Colton (C) number. See Fig. 16 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrangle( s)

Date of Investigating
Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologi st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. San Bernardino County (Figs. 16 and 17)

(Rial to)

(D 198

San Bernardino 08/2U/72 Leighton and

North

12/12/75 Associates

03/10/76

Project #'s 2173, 75368-1, 75368-2

Two trenches to a maximum depth of 10 feet in old alluvial terrace deposits
estimated to be "as old or older than 11,000 years (Holocene) and may be
as old as Pleistocene (11,000 - 3,000,000 ± years) located directly southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197Unn), no faulting.

San Bernardino (U) 488

Devo re

6/20/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1213

Trench, average depth 11 feet, southwest of covered traces San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197Umm), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (69) 1093

San Bernardino 11/13/79 G.A. Clopine South

Baseline Ave. and Martin Road

Trenches up to 8 feet deep across concealed traces of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), zone of deformed Holocene aluvium in fault zone, 5 feet wide, extends
to within 2 feet of surface.

(San Bernardino) (70) 1U9U

San Bernardino 6/23/80 G.A Clopine South

North of Baseline Ave.

Trenches, 9 to 10 feet deep, across concealed traces of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), fault in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (71) 636

San Bernardino 7/28/77 Gary S. Rasmussen

South

and Associates

Project #1229

Trench and test pits southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting i n Ho Iocene a I Iuv i urn.

(San Bernardino) (72) 1502

San Bernardino 10/27/81 G.A. Clopine South

2010 West Foothill Blvd.

Trench, average depth 10 feet, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernardino) (73) 1092

San Bernardino 10/29/79 Woodward-Clyde

South

12/07/79 Consultants

Project #U1158F/0009

Trenches, 7-11 feet deep, across "aerial photo lineament" and northeast of Claremont fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP
Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadra ngle(s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. San Bernardino County (Figs. 16 and 17)

(San Bernard!no) (7U) 1U91

San Bernard!no 1/22/80 Meda I I, Aragon,

South

U/30/80 Worswick and

Associates

Project #R1662A

Trenches 8-10 feet deep, directly northeast of principal trace of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), 5 to 25 feet wide zone of fractures forming fault zone in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (75) 1501

San Bernardino U/23/79 G.A. Clopine South

Scenic Drive area

Three trenches up to 15 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (76) 150U

San Bernardino 10/29/81 Gary S. Rasmussen

South

and Associates

Project #1768

VuJ>l
(Col ton)

(D 237

Three trenches, 6 to 12 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), fault with 5 feet wide zone of bedding deformation and 2 feet of vertical dis-
placement in Holocene alluvium.

San Bernardino 5/7/76 F.A. Fleming South

Co I ton Ave. and Harbor Industrial Drive

Trenches up to 11 feet deep, across strands of San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1977tt), faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (77) 1H99

San Bernardino 10/10/80 Gary S. Rasmussen

South

and Associates

Project #1662

Trenches, 10-16 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (78)

639

San Bernardino 12/5/77 Gary S. Rasmussen

South

and Associates

Project #1278

Trench 9-11 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium. "Sand boil" probably caused by shaking during
earthquakes of Richter magnitude 6-1/2 or greater.

(San Bernard!no) (79) 1U96

San Bernard!no 6/2U/80 Geological Systems

South

Evaluation Co.

Project #333

Trenches, maximum depth 12 feet across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (80) 1U92

San Bernardino U/29/80 G.A. Clopine South

South "E" St., and Fa i rway Drive

Trench, average depth 9 feet, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

County (City)
of Juri sd let ion

County (City)
Ft le Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Investigating

Report(s)

F i rm or

(Mo/da/yr)

Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. San Bernard!no County (Figs. 16 and 17)

(San Bernard!no) (81) 1018

San Bernard!no 5/75
South

W.A. Wahler and Associates

Project #0827

Trenches, average depth 11 feet, across "concealed" trace of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt). no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (82) 1091

San Bernardino 7/19/79 Pioneer Consultants South

Job #3249-001

Trenches up to 11 feet deep, across concealed strand of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), 20 foot wide fault zone in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (83) 863

San Bernardino 7/25/78 Gary S. Rasmussen

South

and Associates

Project #1371

Trench, 9-11 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(Co I ton)

(2) 752

San Bernardino 6/6/78 Leighton and

South

Associates

Project #678178-01

Trenches to 11 feet deep, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (84) 1503

San Bernardino 5/20/80 Gary S. Rasmussen

South

and Associates

Parcel No. 5656, NE of Southern Pacific & Hunts Ln.

Trenches, average depth 10 feet, directly northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1977tt), sand dikes and boils and fault in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (85) 11UO

San Bernardino 2/08/80 Leighton and

South

2/25/80 Associates

Project #678302-05 678302-OU

Several trenches, 11 to 12 feet deep, across concealed traces of San Jacinto fault and "aerial photo lineaments" (CDMG, 1977tt), faulting, syncline, and sand blows in Holocene alluvium. Square headed nails in offset sediment possibly indicate faulting since 1800*s. Fault indicated by differences in
groundwater levels.

(San Bernard!no) (86)

867

San Bernardino U/78 South

C. Price

Area No. 403 717

Trenches up to 9 feet deep, across "aerial photo lineament" (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

(San Bernard!no) (87)

525

San Bernardino U/25/77 Gary S. Rasmussen

South

and Associates

Project #1199

Trenches up to 11 feet deep, across "aerial photo lineament" (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

COMG
AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jaclnto Fault Zone. San Bernard!no County (Figs. 16 and 17)

(San Bernardino) (88) 652

San Bernard!ino 7/22/77 Gary S. Rasmus sen

South

and Associates

Project #1226

Trench up to 11 feet deep, across "aerial photo lineament 11 (CDMG, 1977tt), no faulting in Holocene alluvium.

ON
Fig. 18 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto fault zone between Sunnymead and Idyllwild by Riverside County number. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

Fig. 19 - Locations of engineering geology reports along San Jacinto fault zone in Hemet area by Riverside County number. See Fig. 18 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le
Number

CDMG
AP Fi le Number

7-1/2
Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating
Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside

Sunnymead

11/30/72 Gallaher and Bovey

Tract No. U616

One trench, average depth 10 feet, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197Uk). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

Hemet

2/19/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1033-0

Four trenches, 12-15 feet deep, across Casa Loma .fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trenches 1-U: faulting with vertical offsets up to 5.5 feet in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965)

Riverside

Hemet

11/11/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1055-2

Four trenches, 11-12 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside
00

Hemet

9/18/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1060

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980J). faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

No

R i ve rs i de

851 Hemet

9/18/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1056

Three trenches, 11-12 feet deep, across and southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trenches 1 and 2: normal faulting with offsets up to 3 feet in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

Hemet

9/2U/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1058

One trench, 8-12 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

Hemet

9/2U/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1057

Two trenches, average depth 11 feet, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trenches 1 and 2: two normal faults, with combined total offset of U feet, in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

Hemet

10/15/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1070

No trenching southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Fault located 250 feet northeast of site by prominent scarp in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisd ict ion

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrangle( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside

8

Sunnymead

10/21/7U Lewis S. Lohr Revi sed
3/U/75

Parcel Map 6286

Two trenches, maximum depth 11 feet, across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197Uk). Southeasterly trench: right-lateraI faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers,
1965).

Riverside

11 Hemet

10/8/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1062

One trench, 11-12 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 10 80 San Jacinto 10/23/71* Pioneer Consultants

Job #1951-001

Trench, maximum depth 1U feet, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980S). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

vo Riverside 11 12 Hemet

10/25/7M Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1073

Two trenches and one pit, 10-11 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

13

Hemet

9/2M/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1059

No trenching northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Presence of fault a few hundred feet to the southwest determined by projection of a Iineation on aerial photos and previous trenching in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

R i ve rs i de 15 79 NW-1/U IdylIwiId

11/12/7U Lew i s S. Loh r Revi sed
12/7U

Baldy Mountain Recreational Vehicle Park

No trenching on Hot Springs fault (CDMG, 197t*p). Fault location based on topographic expression in colluvial deposits of Pleistocene age (Qc of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 16 33 Hemet

10/15/7M Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1068

No trenching southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Fault located by prominent scarp 65 feet northeast of site in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

17

Hemet

11/26/71 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1076

Two trenches, 10-12 feet deep, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197UJ). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of
Juri sdiction

County (City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrangle(s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Rivers ide

18

Hemet

10/25/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1075

One trench, 11 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

20 1U6

Hemet

7/23/75 Earth Science Laboratories, Inc.

Job #337-S

Two trenches, average depth 11-12 feet, across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197UJ). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Rivers ide 21 U6 Hemet

12/23/7U Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1080

One trench, 11-13 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Rivers ide

23 517

San Jacinto Hemet

2/12/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1086

Five trenches, 10 feet deep, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 19801,j). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

U2 Hemet

2/1*1/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1088

No trenching southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Presence of fault 1000+ feet to the northeast determined by scarp in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965)

Riverside

25

Hemet

3/U/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1090

One trench, average depth 9 feet, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197UJ). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 26 71 San Jacinto 3/10/75 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #M-75-3

One trench, 10 feet deep, southwest of Park Hill fault (Sharp, 1972). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

27

San Jacinto

3/2U/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1093

One trench, 81/2 feet deep, northeast of Bautista Creek fault (CDMG, 1980S). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

R i ve rsi de 28 88 San Jacinto 3/20/75 Lewis S. Lohr

Job # 5-75-3

One trench, 10 feet deep, across Park Hill fault (Sharp, 1972). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Juri sd iction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP File
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report(s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 191

Riverside 29 89 San Jacinto U/4/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1096

One trench, 10 1/2 to 11 feet deep, southwest of Bautista Creek fault (CDMG, 19801) No faulting in Bautista Formation or Holocene alluvium (Qc and QaI of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 30 75 Hemet

U/10/75 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #6-75-U

Two trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

31 126

Sunnymead

5/21/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1101

Three trenches, approximately 10 feet deep, across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197UK) Trenches 1-3: reverse faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

32 130

Hemet

3/3/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1087

No trenching southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Fault located 2100 feet east of site by prominent fault scarp in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

33 125

San Jacinto

5/24/75 Lewis S. Lohr

Job # 7-75-5

One trench, 10 feet deep, across trace of hidden fault in Park Hill fault zone (CDMG, 197UI). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

1U5 San Jacinto 6/30/75 Lewis S. Lohr

Job # 8-75-6

One trench, 10 feet deep, across trace of Park Hill fault (Sharp, 1972). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

36 140

San Jacinto

6/16/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #110U

Four trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). Trenches 1 to U: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

37 1U2

Hemet

U/5/75

Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1092

Three trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

38 158

San Jacinto

10/29/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1118

Three trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Numbe r

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) Fi rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Rivers ide

39 169

Hemet

11/21/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1121

Two trenches, averaging 11 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

17U San Jacinto 12/10/75 F. Allen Fleming

Tentative Tract #6970 (UU60)

Two trenches, 10 feet deep, east of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

213 San Jacinto 12/29/75 F. Allen Fleming

Three trenches, 11 feet deep, east of southwest branch of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980i) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside to

211 San Jacinto 3/30/76 Irvine Soils
Engineering and Testing Laboratory

Job #1019-00

One trench and 5 pits, approximately 8 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980!). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

190 Hemet

1/19/76 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1121*

Three trenches, 10-13 feet deep, across and northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trench 1-A: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

207 Hemet

3/5/76 Lewis S. Lohr

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, southwest of unnamed fault in Casa Loma fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

1*7 210

San Jacinto

3/22/76 Charles Price

Job #346-757

One trench, 9-10 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

(*8 227

Hemet

2/25/76 Gary S. Rasmussen
and Associates

Project #1128

Two trenches, 10-12 feet deep, northeast of and across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trench 2: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

1*9

San Jacinto

6/3/76

Lewis S. Lohr

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, across trace of unnamed fault in Casa Loma-Bautista Creek fault zone (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers,
1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi te Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Sani Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Rivers ide

Hemet

12/26/74 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1079

One trench, averaging 10 feet deep, northeast of unnamed fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Rivers ide

52 315

San Jacinto

7/29/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #13-76-7

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

321 San Jacinto 8/23/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #114-76-8

One trench, 10-11 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

332 Hemet

9/9/76 Stickel and Associates

Project #1829-001

One trench, average depth 10 feet, across unnamed fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1974J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

55 330

San Jacinto

10/13/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #15-76-10

One trench, maximum depth 11 feet, across unnamed (Bautista Creek) fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in "Pleistocene Bautista Formation (?)"
(Qc of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

56 334

San Jacinto

10/21/76 Envicom Corporation

Job #CV 1864-W

Four trenches, 10 feet deep, across San Jacinto and Claremont faults (CDMG, 19801). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

57 354

Hemet

8/5/76 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1151

One trench, 10-11 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

58 353

San Jacinto

10/4/76 Envicom Corporation

Tentative Tract 8072

Three trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault and east of the Hot Springs fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium or fan
deposits (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

60 356

Hemet

9/1/76 Pioneer Consultants

Job #2429-001

Three trenches, 10-12 feet deep, northeast of unnamed fault in Casa Loma fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Invest igating Report(s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside

61 355

San Jacinto

11/1/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #17-76-10

One trench, 8-1U feet deep, southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

62 36U

Hemet

11/2U/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #18-76-11

One trench, 10-11 feet deep, northeast of unnamed fault in Casa Loma-Bautista Creek fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

63 382

San Jacinto

12/20/76 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #19-76-12

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, southwest of unnamed fault in Casa Loma-Bautista Creek fault zone (CDMG, 1980S). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

6U U07

Hemet

1/25/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #20-77-1

One trench, 10-11 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

R i ve rs i de

65 412

San Jacinto

1/2U/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1172

One trench, 10-13 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

66 U2U

Hemet

2/19/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #22-77-2

One trench, 10 feet deep, northeast of unnamed fault in Casa Loma fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

67 U22

Hemet

2/15/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #21-77-2

One trench, 10 feet deep, across unnamed fault in Casa Loma fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

68

Hemet

1/11/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1169

One trench and a pit, 11-12 feet deep, northeast of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197UJ). No faulting in late Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

580 San Jacinto 3/21/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1158

One trench, 11-12 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980S). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

76 475

San Jacinto

5/7/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #25-77-5

One trench, maximum depth 11 feet, across unnamed fault in Casa Loma-Bautista Creek fault zone (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of
Jurisd iction

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigat ing Report( s) Fi rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto FauIt Zone, Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19j

Riverside

77 708

San Jacinto

11/17/75 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1119

Two trenches, minimum depth 11 feet, across Casa Loma and related en echelon faults (CDMG, 1980i). Trenches 1,2: normal and right-lateraI faulting in Holocene alluvium
(Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

80 485

San Jacinto

5/17/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #27-77-5

Three trenches, maximum depth 13 feet, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). Trench 1: series of faults in Holocene alluvium with displacements varying between .5 and 7 feet. Trench A: numerous stepped normal faults in Holocene alluvium. Trench B: numerous, small, stepped normal faults and one prominent fault with gouge in
Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

81 480

Hemet

4/5/76 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1132

Five trenches, 10-12 feet deep, across and northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J) Trenches 2,A,B,C: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

83 483

Hemet

6/5/77 Lew is S. Loh r

Job #29-77-6

One trench, 10 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

85 518

Hemet

7/15/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #32-77-7

Two trenches, 10 feet deep, across unnamed fault (Casa Loma fault ?) (CDMG, 1980J). Normal faulting in both trenches in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

86

San Jacinto

7/5/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1210

Trench, averaging 11 feet deep, southwest of Claremont fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

87 534

San Jacinto

8/15/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #33-77-8

One trench, maximum depth 12 feet, across hidden fault northeast of Park Hill fault (CDMG, 1974!). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

89 549

Hemet

8/29/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #35-77-8

One trench, 10 feet deep, northeast of unnamed fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1974J). No faulting in Pleistocene fanglomerates (Qc of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

90 1252

San Jacinto, Hemet

5/10/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1192

Three trenches, maximum depth 20 feet, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i,j). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) File Numbe r

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone, Riverside County (Figs. 18 and. 19.)

Riverside

91 574

San Jacinto

5/10/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1192

Three trenches, maximum depth 17 feet, northeast of inferred trace of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

92 583

Hemet

10/6/77 Stickel and Associates Tentative Tract #9567

One trench, average depth 10 feet, northeast of unnamed fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 197**j). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

93 573

San Jacinto

9/27/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #37-77-9

Two trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trench 1: maximum displacement of 2.U feet by reverse and right-lateraI (?) displacement. Trench 2: several faults exposed which exhibited normal or reverse displacements from 1-6 inches. Faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

58*4 Hemet

10/U/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #38-77-10

Seven trenches, 10 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trenches 1-7: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965) with "three displacement events"
with offsets up to 1 foot.

R i ve rs i de

95 596

San Jacinto

6/12/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #30-77-6

One trench, maximum depth 13 feet, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

R i ve rs i de

99 616

Hemet

11/1/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #4*1-77-11

Two trenches, 6-15 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Ri vers ide 100 630

San Jac into

11/21/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #12**8

One trench, 10-15 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). No
faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 101 632

San Jacinto

12/9/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #U2-77-12

Four trenches, maximum depth 1** feet, across trace of unnamed fault in Casa LomaBautista Creek fault zone (CDMG, 1980!). All four trenches exposed evidence of normal faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 108 659

San Jacinto

12/16/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #U3-77-12

Two trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, across Casa Loma and Bautista Creek faults (CDMG, 1980!). Trenches 1,2: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdlet ion

County (City) File Number

CDMG AP File
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigat ing Report(s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside 109 658

San Jacinto

1/6/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #45-78-1

One trench, 12 feet deep, across trace of hidden fault in Park Hill fault zone (CDMG, 197i4i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 110 670

Hemet

12/28/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #44-77-12

Two trenches, 10-14 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trenches 1 and 2: normal faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 111 633

Hemet

1/9/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #46-78-1

One trench, approximately 10 feet deep, northeast of unnamed fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 112 669

San Jacinto

1/30/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #48-78-1

Riverside 114 676

One trench, 10 feet deep, northeast of hidden fault in Park Hill fault zone (CDMG, 1974J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

San Jacinto

2/15/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1292

One trench, 11-12 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980S), No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 115 68(4

San Jacinto

2/22/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #50-78-2

Riverside 117 683 Riverside 119 745 Riverside 120 725

Three trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, across trace of hidden fault in Park Hill fault zone (CDMG, 1974J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Hemet

11/23/77 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1270

One trench 11-13 feet deep southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG 1980J). Fractures present but no faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers 1965).

San Jacinto

3/29/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1286

Two trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 19801). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Hemet

2/9/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #49-78-2

One trench, 10-11 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City) File Number

CDMG AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside 121 739

San Jacinto

3/13/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #51-78-3

Five trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, across trace of unnamed fault in Casa Loma-

Bautista Creek fault zone (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Hplocene alluvium (Qal of

Rogers, 1965).

*

Riverside 123 75U

Hemet

1/21/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #47-78-1

Four trenches, maximum 16 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980j'). Trenches 1-U: Normal faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

125

San Jacinto

U/7/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1307

Four trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, across, east and west of Park Hill fault
(CDMG, 197MI). Trench 2: northeast trending offset observed in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965) but was attributed to "secondary effects of strong ground motion" such as "hydroconsolidation of subsurface soils" or "liquefaction."

ON
oo

Rivers ide 126 753

San Jacinto

5/16/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #60-78-5

One trench, 10 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulti ng in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 127 756

San Jacinto

U/22/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #57-78-U

Five trenches, maximum depth 1U feet, across trace of unnamed fault and Casa Loma or related fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1980i). Displacement observed in trenches 1 and U across Casa Loma or related fault in Holocene stream deposits (Qal of Rogers, 1965). Trench 5: clay filled fractures and 2 inch vertical displacement attributed to settlement on unnamed fault in Holocene alluvium (Qal of
Rogers, 1965).

R i ve rs i de 130 778

Lakeview

6/3/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #61-78-6

Two trenches, approximately 10 feet deep, across and west of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 197UI). Trench 1: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 131 779 Riverside 132 789

Hemet

6/30/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #63-78-6

One trench, approximately 10 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

San Jacinto

U/28/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #58-78-U

One trench, maximum depth 14 feet, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). Normal faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Numbe r

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigat ing Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside 133 788

Hemet

6/16/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1359

Two trenches, 10-11 feet deep, across and southwest of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980J) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

R i ve rs i de 13U 786

San Jacinto

3/28/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #53-78-3

One trench, maximum depth 13 feet, across unnamed fault in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene a Iluvium (QaI of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 135 787

San Jacinto

5/3/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #59-78-5

One trench, 10 feet deep, northeast of Park Hill fault and hidden fault (CDMG, 197UJ). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 138 810

San Jacinto

7/8/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #6U-78-7

ON

Two trenches, maximum depth 1U feet, west of San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 1U5 993

San Jacinto

02/77 10/78

Irvine SoiIs Eng ineering

Job #1039-00 and 1575-00

Five trenches, maximum depth 12 feet, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). Trenches 3,U, and 5: offsets attributable to faulting in bedded clayey silt layer in Holocene
alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 1U6 9U8

Hemet

5/U/78 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1308

Six trenches, 10-12 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Trenches 1,2,3,i*,5,: faulting with vertical offsets up to 1 foot in Holocene alluvium (Qal
of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 11*7 860

Hemet

8/31/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #67-78-8

Three trenches, 10 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 151 880

San Jacinto

U/23/77 Lewis S. Lohr and Associates

Job #2U-77-U

Six trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, across and southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). Vertical displacements up to 2U inches in northerly diagonal trench
and in two short trenches in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) File Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigat ing Report(s) Fi rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Rivers ide

158

San Jacinto

1/16/79 Gary S. Rasmus sen and Associates

Project #1M28

Seven trenches, 10-12 feet deep, across Bautista Creek fault and related faults (CDMG, 1980i). Three fault zones identified from offset observed in trenches 1,U,5,6 and 7. Fault zone 1: faulting in late Pleistocene Bautista Formation
(Qc of Rogers, 1965). Fault zone 2: late Pleistocene Bautista beds faulted against Holocene (?) alluvium (Qc and QaI of Rogers, 1965). Fault zone 3: faulting in Bautista Formation, no faulting in overlying Holocene alluvium (Qc and QaI of Rogers,
1965).

Riverside 160 926

San Jacinto

10/16/7U Lewis S. Lohr

Parcel Map 13825

No trenching in Park Hill fault zone (CDMG, 1974i). No physiographic evidence for faulting found.

Riverside 163 927

Hemet

2/2/79 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #71-79-2

One trench, 10 feet deep, southwest of unnamed fault in Casa Loma-Bautista Creek fault zone (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 16M 9U5

El Casco

2/10/79 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #72-79-2

No trenching in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 197Mm). Location of fault based on shear and fracture zone in Pliocene non-marine rocks (PC of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 166 956

Hemet

3/5/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project

Three trenches, 10-12 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Fracturing and offset bedding with minimum vertical displacements of 5 feet in Holocene alluvium
(Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

171 1205

San Jacinto

1/31/79 Gary S. Rasmus sen and Associates

Project

One trench, 10-12 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 173 969

San Jacinto

1/3/79 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project /JMM2U

Two trenches, 10-12 feet deep, southwest of Claremont fault (CDMG, 197Mi) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Rivers ide 182 996

San Jacinto

5/30/79 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #77-79-5

One trench, averaging 10 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). Faulting, with displacements of up to 6 inches, in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisd iction

County (City)
File
Number

CDMG
AP File
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rang Ie( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside

18U 1035

San Jacinto

6/5/79 Lew is S. Loh r

Job #78-79-6

Five trenches, maximum depth 1U feet, across Bautista Creek and unnamed fault
(CDMG, 1980J). Faulting in all five trenches with displacements of up to 6.8 feet in Pleistocene Bautista Formation and Holocene alluvium (Qc and QaI of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

191

El Casco

10/1/79 Pioneer Consultants

Job #3213-007

Thirteen trenches, 5-13 feet deep, across three unnamed faults northeast and parallel
to San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197Um). Trenches 1,5,5a,11: offsetting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965) along fault 2. Trenches 2,7,10: offsetting in
Pliocene San Timoteo Formation (PC of Rogers, 1965) and questionable evidence for
offset in Holocene deposits along fault 3. Trenches 3,U: offsetting in San Timoteo Formation, no faulting in Holocene alluvium along fault U. '

Riverside

192 1066

San Jacinto

3/9/79 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #75-79-3

Two trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Pleistocene "sediments" (?) or Holocene alluvium (Qc (?) and Qal of
Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

193 1275

San Jacinto

5/10/77 Gary S. Rasmus sen and Associates

Project #1196

Two trenches, maximum depth 20 feet, southwest of the Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 19801). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

201 1135

San Jacinto

5/9/79 GeoSoiIs, Inc.

W.O. 596-602-00

Twenty-three trenches and pits, 8-15 feet deep, across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980i). Trenches 3,U,5,8, and 15: displacement of alluvial layers ranging from 3-18 inches in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965). Trench 13: U-6 inches of displacement
in Holocene alluvium.

Riverside

20U 1130

Hemet

3/1U/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #80-80-3

One trench, 10-11 feet deep, across Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). Two separate zones of faulting with 1.5 feet and 2.8 feet vertical displacement in Holocene
alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 207 1151

El Casco

U/25/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #82-80-U

One trench, 10 feet deep, across trace of Claremont (?) fault (CDMG, 197Um). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

210 1198

Hemet

U/21/80 Gary S. Rasmussen and Associates

Project #1608

Five trenches, 10-12 feet deep, across and southwest of Lake Street fault (CDMG, 1980J) Trenches 1A, 1B, 2, 3B: faulting with vertical offsets of up to 18 inches in Holocene
alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

County
(City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City)
File Number

CDMG
AP
File Number

7-1/2
Minute Quadrang le( s )

Date of Investigating
Report(s) Firm or ( Mo/da /yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

/

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Fiqs. 18 and 19)

Riverside 217 1212

San Jacinto

6/2/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #83-80-6

One trench, maximum depth 13 feet, northeast of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980i) No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 220 1237

San Jacinto La kev i ew

U/10/80 Pioneer Consultants

Job #3397-001

Three trenches, 10-13 feet deep, across and southwest of unnamed faults in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 1980i, 197UI). Trench 1: faulting in Holocene alluvium
(Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Rivers ide

223 1227

Hemet

8/8/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #84-80-9

One trench, 10 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

227 1308

San Jacinto

U/23/81 Irvine Soils Engineering, Inc.

Job #2023-00

to Twelve trenches, 3-11 feet deep, across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 1980i). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Rivers ide

228 1251

La kev i ew

9/26/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #85-80-9

Two trenches, averaging 10 feet deep, across unnamed faults in San Jacinto fault zone (CDMG, 197*il). Trenches 1 and 2: faulting, with vertical displacements up to 5 feet in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

232 127U

Sunnymead

10/22/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #86-80-10

One trench, approximately 10 feet deep, across San Jacinto fault (CDMG, 197**k). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside

23U 1300

El Casco

12/16/80 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #87-80-12

Eighteen trenches, maximum depth 11 feet, across San Jacinto and related faults (CDMG, 197Um). Trenches 1-6,7-17: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers,
1965).

Riverside

2UO 1315

Hemet

12/U/80 Leighton and Associates

Project #680899-01

No trenching in "Park Hill" fault zone (San Jacinto fault of Rogers, 1965). No physiographic or magnetic evidence for faulting in Pleistocene Bautista Formation
(Qt of Rogers, 1965).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (Cjty) File Number

CDMG AP File Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Firm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Jacinto Fault Zone. Riverside County (Figs. 18 and 19)

Riverside 251 1368

Hemet

6/18/81 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #88-81-6

One trench, 10 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

Riverside 266 1469

Hemet

5/20/82 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #95-32-05

One trench, 10 feet deep, southwest of Casa Loma fault (CDMG, 1980J). in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Rogers, 1965).

No faulting No faulting

u>

\
Fig. 20 - Locations of engineering geology reports along faults in San Fernando area and Raymond Hill fault by Los Angeles County and City (*) numbers. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

Ui
.Fig. 21 - Locations of engineering geology reports along faults in San Fernando area by Los Angeles County and City (*) numbers. See Fig. 20 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) GeoIog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Fernando Area Faults. Los Angeles County (Figs. 20 and 21)

(Los Angeles) (4) 384

San Fernando 6/19/76 John D. MerriI

Project #63408

Two trenches, 8 feet deep, across Sylmar fault (CDMG, 1979V). Trench 1: faulting attributable to February 9, 1971 earthquake in older alluvium (Qos of Barrows, et a I.. 1974).

(Los Angeles) (5)

393

San Fernando

10/21/76 The Earth Group, Inc.

W.O. 0P-6021

One trench, unspecified depth, across trace of Sylmar fault (CDMG, 1979v). Loose sand zone and truncation of alluvial stratification cited as evidence for faulting in older alluvial deposits (Qos of Barrows, et a I.. 1974).

(Los Angeles) (6)

858

San Fernando

4/7/78 Ralph Ernest Smith and Associates

12924 Chippewa St., Sy I ma r

One trench, 5 feet deep, south of Sylmar fault (CDMG, 1979v). Faulting, confirmed by seismic profile analysis, in "fill material" (Qaf and Qsc (?) of Barrows, et a I.. 1974).

(Los Angeles) (7) 1250

San Fernando 1/28/80 GeoSoils, Inc.

W.O. 01067-VN

Three trenches, 5 feet deep, across Sylmar fault (CDMG, 1979v). Trench 1: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qsc of Barrows, et a I.. 1974).

(Los Angeles) (8)

955

San Fernando

1/16/79 Foundation Engineering Tentative Tract No. 36183 Co., Inc.

Ten trenches, average depth 5 feet, across trace of Sylmar fault (CDMG, 1979v). Trench 8: faulting in Towns ley, Plco Formation bedrock. Trenches 4,10: sandstone bedrock of Townsley, Pico Formation thrust over Holocene alluvium (Ttp and Qsc of Barrows, et a I.. 1974).

(Los Angeles) (9)

307

San Fernando

3/1/71 F. Beach Lelghton and Associates, Inc.

Project #1267

Five borings, 22 to 30 feet deep, and 2 pits 8 feet deep, across Veterans fault (CDMG, 1979v). Boring 5 and pit 2: faulting in claystone-siItstone and terrace gravel beds (Tqs and Qof of Barrows, et a I.. 1974).

Los Angeles (80) 1376

San Fernando 9/1/81 Geoplan, Inc.

Project J15580, Tentative Parcel Map 8075, 12489 N. Blue Sage Road, Kagel Canyon District

Two trenches, maximum depth 17 feet, north of Kagel fault (CDMG, 1979v). No faulting in Pliocene Pico Formation, older alluvium or residual soil (Ttp, Qoa and Qal of Barrows, et a I.. 1974).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
File Number

CDMG AP
File Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang Ie(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Firm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

San Fernando Area Faults. Los Angeles County (Figs. 20 and 21)

Los Angeles (81) 1322

San Fernando

3/23/80 Brian A. Robinson and Associates, Inc.

J.O. No. 0336, 12271 Forest Trail, Kagel Canyon

Two trenches, maximum depth 8 feet and log of steep road cut, north of Kagel fault (CDMG, 1979v). Trenches 1,2: no faulting in Miocene Mode Io Formation shale and conglomerate or Holocene alluvium (Tm and QaI of Barrows, et a I.. 197U). Road cut: No faulting in Pliocene Pico Formation sandstone or Holocene alluvium (Ttp and Qal of Barrows, et a I.. 197U).

Los Angeles (82) 117U

San Fernando

1/17/80 Geoplan, Inc.

Project #8U637, 12003 N.
Kagel Canyon Road, Lakeview Terrace District

Five trenches, 8-15 feet deep, west of Lakeview fault (CDMG, 1979v). Trench U: slight fracturing, but no faulting in Miocene Modelo Formation. No fracturing or faulting in overlying stream terrace deposits or residual soil (Tm, Qt and Qal (?) of Barrows, et a I.. 197U).

Los Angeles (86)

-

San Fernando

2/3/81

California GeoSystems, Inc.

Job #GS80-1123. Tentative Tract No. U0605. Sylmar.

Three trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, across trace of Veterans fault (CDMG, 1979v). Trench 3: faulting and fracturing in lower Pleistocene Pacoima Formation (?) and terrace deposits (TQs and Qof of Barrows, et a I.. 197U).

Raymond Hilt Fault. Los Angeles County (Fig. 20)

Los Angeles (83) 1U28

Mt. Wilson

2/18/82 California GeoSystems, Inc.

Job # GS82-210. Proposed PM 1U975, Arcadia.

One trench, 13 feet deep, northwest of Raymond Hill fault (CDMG, 1977w). No faulting in pre-Holocene alluvium (Qc of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Los Angeles (8U) 1226

Mt. Wilson

9/17/80 Bob Dickey GeotechnicaI, Inc.

Job # 0-176. Tentative PM 12913, 10UO San Gabriel Blvd.

Two trenches, maximum depth 7 feet, northwest of Raymond Hill fault (CDMG, 1977w). No faulting in alluvium (Qc of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Los Angeles (85)

-

Mt. Wilson

10/9/73 Leighton-Yen and Associates, Inc.

Project #73220-1. Tentative Tract 320U1, San Marino.

Three trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, across Raymond Hill fault (CDMG, 1977w). Trenches 1,3: Fracturing, shearing and faulting in older alluvium (Qc of
Jennings and Strand, 1969).

00
Fig. 22 - Locations of engineering geology reports along Inglewood-Newport fault zone in Ing1ewood and Seal Beach areas by Los Angeles County, City (*), Huntingdon Beach (**) and Seal Beach (S) numbers. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

.;:; Iff :: ---. -f" ..5- . > 'i; \^>'.t^

KfW

* i' -<'/^V^*v

t It !-< r* «.

;-..- : .» v

vo

Fig. 23 - Locations of engineering geology reports along faults in Inglewood area by Inglewood City number. See Fig. 22 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols

0o0
L
Fig. 24 - Locations of engineering geology reports along Inglewood-Newport fault zone by City of Long Beach and Signal Hill (*) numbers. See Fig. 22 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

» '*." .«v .--,
00
Fig. 25 - Locations of engineering geology reports along Inglewood-Newport fault zone by City of Huntington Beach number. See Fig. 22 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County (City)
of Jurisdlet ion

County (City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP
Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

(Los Angeles) (1)

8UU Hoilywood

5/2/78 John D. MerriI I

Project #84393

Two trenches, maximum depth 6-1/2 feet, in Inglewood-Newport fault zone (CDMG, 1976hh). Trench 1: faulting in "early Pleistocene Ing Iewood Formation", but no faulting in overlying "Holocene soil profile" (Pu of Jennings and Strand,
1969).

(Los Angeles) (2) 1262 Ho I Iywood

1/5/81 WiI Iiam R. Munson

4000 Don AI eg re Place, BaIdw i n Hills

One trench, 6.2 feet deep, across trace of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG> 1976hh)
Normal faulting with .5 to 2.0 feet displacement in Tertiary-early Quaternary "A Formation" bedrock, but no faulting in Holocene slopewash deposits (Pu of
Jennings and Strand, 1969).

(Los Angeles) (3) 1206 Hoilywood

5/7/80 Thomas Clements Associates

Job #3-80-112

Two trenches, 5 feet deep, across trace of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976hh).

oroo

Trenches 1,2: "cracking or faulting" reported, but no lithological description or formation name given. (Qm (?) of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Los Angeles (76)

Hoilywood

U/23/79 HRC Geotechnical Consultants, Inc.

Tentative Tract #33172. Stocker St. near Valley Ridge.

Two trenches and 26 test pits, maximum depth 15 feet, across Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976hh). Trench T-13 and test pits T-8, T-9: "sheared and intensely fractured fault zone containing many soil-filled cracks, calcareous filled fractures, and fault
breccia" in Pleistocene San Pedro Formation bedrock (Qm of Jennings and Strand, 1969).

Los Angeles (77)

IngIewood

5/15/70 Glenn A. Brown and Associates

Project #69138-A. Tract No,
2863U, Carson.

One trench, 12 feet deep, across Avalon-Compton fault (CDMG, 1976M). No faulting in
Holocene alluvium (Qal of Jennings, 1962).

Los Angeles (78)

252 Long Beach

3/23/76 Pacific Soils Engineering, Inc.

W.O. #200637. Carol Cable Bldg., 2665 Del Amo Blvd.

Three trenches, maximum depth 11 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Jennings, 1962).

Los Angeles (79)

U01 Long Beach

2/10/77 LeRoy Cranda I I and Associates

Job #E-7702U. Vicinity of Dominguez St. and Long Beach Freeway.

No trenching across Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Subsurface section across projected trace of fault constructed from logs of exploration borings drilled by firm in 1967. Sandy layers in borings appear to be continuous across projected trace of fault indicating that Holocene deposits to a depth of at least UO feet have not been dis-
rupted. (Qal of Jennings, 1962).

County
(City) of
Jurisdiction

County
(City) File
Number

CDMG AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrang le( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologi st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

IngIewood

(1) 1285 IngIewood

12/22/80 C. Michael Scull in

Project #80168. Southerly 65 ft. of lot 246, tentative Tract No. 401633, 924 Enterprise Avenue.

One trench, maximum depth 9 feet, west of segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976!i). No faulting in colluvium or upper Pleistocene coastal plain deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qal and Qt of Jennings, 1962).

IngIewood

(2) 1224 IngIewood

9/4/79 Geo. Systems, Inc.

Job #G59-307. Proposed Condominium Complex, 744-748 N. Euca-
lyptus Avenue.

One trench, 4 1/2 to 11 feet deep, west of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976H). No faulting in alluvium or underlying bedrock (Qal and Qt of Jennings, 1962).

IngIewood

(3) 1117 IngIewood

1/10/80 Harley Tucker, Inc.

Project #384-79. Lot 690, Tract 1453, 323 East Plymouth
St.

oo

One trench, maximum depth 6 1/2 feet, east of segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 19761i). No faulting in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings,

1962).

IngIewood

1122

IngIewood

3/7/80 Lockwood-Singh and Associates

Project Ref. #1759-92. Proposed
Eleven-unit Condominium, lot 63, Tract 4242, 530-540 Hazel St.

Two trenches, 6 feet deep, east of segment of Ing I ewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976M). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

IngIewood

(5) 1202 IngIewood

4/21/80 Lockwood-Singh and Associates

Project Ref. #1727-92. Proposed Eight-unit Condominium lot 615, Tract 1453, Book 20, 415 Exton Ave.

Three trenches, maximum depth 7 1/2 feet, between segments of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 19768i). Trenches 1-3: No faulting in terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings,
1962).

IngIewood

(6) 1203 IngIewood

8/18/80 Lockwood-Singh and Associates

Project Ref. #2092-02. Proposed 20-unit Condominium, 529 Market
St.

Five trenches, maximum depth 8 feet, east of segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 197681). Trenches 2-5: No faulting in Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings,
1962).

County
(City) of
Juri sd ict ion

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rang le|Is)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Inql ewood- Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Thomas Clements Associates and Baseline Consultants,
Inc.

Project #8-80-123. Portion of lot 3, Tract 511, property at the southeast corner of Ivy Ave. and Beach Avenue.

Three trenches, 5 feet deep, across segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 19761i). Trenches 1-3: No faulting in fill material.

IngIewood

(8)

IngIewood

10/28/80 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #670-100. Applebee project, 240 Ivy Avenue.

Two trenches, maximum depth 11 feet, across segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 19761i). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in Pleistocene sand deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962)

IngIewood

(9) 1193 IngIewood

6/30/80 Harley Tucker, Inc.

Project #519-80. Lot 3, block 207, Tract No. 697, 223 Ing Iewood Ave.

Two trenches, 5 feet deep, southeast of Centinela fault (CDMG, 1976ii). Trenches 1,2:

No faulting in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).
00

JS

IngIewood (10) 1190 IngIewood

U/15/80 Geosoils, Inc.

W,0. 1179-VN. Proposed 22-unit

Condominium, 340 West Regent St.

Two trenches, maximum depth U feet, southeast of segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 19761i). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in "older alluvium" (Qt of Jennings, 1962)

IngIewood (11) 1129 IngIewood

2/21/79 LeRoy Cranda I I and Associates

Job #AE-78UOO. Proposed Clinic Bldg. and Parking Structure,
La Brea Avenue and Queen St.

One trench, 10 feet deep, east of segment of Ing Iewcod-Newport fault (CDMG, 197611). No faulting in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

IngIewood (12) 1201 IngIewood

3/2/77 LeRoy Cranda I I and Associates

Job #AE-76103. Proposed Medical Office Bldg., Prairie Avenue and
HowI and Drive.

Six borings, 45 to 60 feet deep, south of Inglewood Park Cemetery fault (CDMG, 19761 i), "Soils encountered show uniform stratification with no apparent discontinuities or offsets" in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation and lower Pleistocene San Pedro Forma-
tion (Qt and Qm of Jennings, 1962).

IngIewood

(13)

IngIewood

11/17/79 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #439-119. Kelso St. Property, 122 Kelso St.

One trench, maximum depth 7 1/2 feet, west of segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976!i). No faulting in Quaternary terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of
Jurisdiction

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-251

IngIewood

1223 IngIewood

7/21/80 Hu Associates

Project #HA-1070-U. Proposed
condominium complex, 7U1 Nutwood St.

One trench, 7 feet deep, southwest of segment of IngIewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976M) No faulting in Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

IngIewood

(15)

IngIewood

1/27/80 C. Michael Scull in

Project #80108. 3UOO to 3500 Century Blvd.

One trench, maximum depth 8 feet, northeast of segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault
(CDMG, 1976H). No faulting in upper Pleistocene coastal plain deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

IngIewood (16) 1145 IngIewood

2/11/80 Triad Foundation Engineering, Inc.

Job #80-30. Proposed Commercial Bldg., 32U9 West Century Blvd.

One trench, 6 to 7 feet deep, southwest of segment of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, oo 19761i). No faulting in "soil deposits" (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach

(1

276 Long Beach

7/20/76 C. Michael SculI in

Project #G76160. Lots 24 and 25, Vista Del Mar Tract, 335U and 336*4 Pine Avenue, Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 11 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach

(2)

277 Long Beach

7/21/76 Evans, Goffman and McCormick

Job #76-85. Lot 3U and portion of lot 33, Tract 2901, Long Beach.

Two trenches, maximum depth 9 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach

(3)

Long Beach

3/13/78 Bob Dickey Geotechnical Inc.

Proposed residential subdivision,
lots 1 to 16 of block B and lots U,6 to 9, and 18 of block C,
Tract No. 2901 (M.B. 36-63), on Elm Avenue and Pasadena Avenue
between Ward low and 33rd Sts.,
Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 8 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene sands (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP
File Number

7-1/2
Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

Inglewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-23)

Long Beach (U)

723 Long Beach

U/1U/78 Action Engineering Consultants

W.O. 138901. Tract 35131, NW corner of Atlantic Avenue and 31st St., Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 6 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qm and Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (5)

Long Beach

2/21/77 Evans, Goffman and McCormick

Job #76-OU. Significance of Alquist-Priolo Special Studies
Zone within Signal Hill.

Two trenches, maximum depth 11 feet, across Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in older alluvium or "Holocene alluvium and
colluvium" (Qm and Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (6)

Long Beach

5/6/77 Denni s R. Allen

South 1/U, lots U and 5, Crescent Heights Tract, Signal Hill.

Three trenches, 8 feet deep, across Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1-3:

oo

No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (7)

707 Long Beach

8/2U/77 John D. MerriI I

Project #7U021. U+ Acre Parcel, NW corner, Termino Avenue and Pacific Coast Highway, Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 21 feet, across Reservoir Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Faulting in Pleistocene San Pedro Formation, but no faulting in overlying Holocene deposits
(Qt and QaI (?) of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (8)

Long Beach

10/29/75 LeRoy Cranda I I and Associates

Job #E-75197. Proposed Cinema Complex between Pacific Coast Highway, Termino Avenue, Mendez St., and Outer Circle, Long Beach,

Two trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, across the Reservoir Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings,
1962).

Long Beach (9)

Long Beach

3/10/77 C. Michael Scull in

Project #77126. Parcel 2, PM 8002, Hathaway Avenue and Outer Circle Drive, Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 6 feet, northeast of Reservoir Hill-Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
File
Number

CDMG
AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle(s)

Date of Investigating
Report( s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-23)

Long Beach (10)

U19 Long Beach

3/10/77 C. Michael SculI in

Project #77127. Parcel U, PM 8002, between Lakewood Blvd. and Outer Traffic Circle Drive, Long Beach.

Two trenches, maximum depth 7 feet, northeast of the Reservoir Hill-Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of
Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (11)

589 Long Beach

6/2/77 Evans, Goffman and McCormick

Job #77-71. Southwest corner. Pacific Coast Highway and Obispo
St., Long Beach.

Two trenches, maximum depth 15 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in "pre-Holocene older alluvium" (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (12)

252 Long Beach

3/23/76 C. Michael SculI in

Project #G76123. Lot 9, Cerritos

Heights Tract, 1725 Loma Avenue

and 1720 Newport Avenue, Long

Beach.

03

Two trenches, maximum depth 6 feet, south of Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1,2: No faulting in terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (13)

195 Long Beach

3/30/76 C. Michael SculI in

Project #G76112A. Lots 7 and 9, Alien and Rheas Signal Hill Tract, 3630-36U2 Wilton St., Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, south of Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (1U)

326 Long Beach

7/28/76 C. Michael SculI in

Project #G76162. Lots 29 and 30, Bonnie Brae Tract, 3506 and 3512 Wilton St., Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 7 1/2 feet, south of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings,
1962).

Long Beach (15)

389 Long Beach

11/8/76 C. Michael SculI in

Project #G76202. Lot 5, 3626 Pacific Coast Highway, westerly 1/2 of lot 6, 3720 Pacific Coast
Highway, Overlook Park Track,
Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 9 feet, southwest of Reservoir Hill-Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle( s)

Date of Investigat ing Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Inglewood-Newport Fault Zone t Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Long Beach (16)

378 Long Beach

3/23/76 C. Michael Scull in

Project #G76126. North 1/U of Farm lot 38, Alamitos Tract, 17UO Grand Avenue, Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, south of trace of Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (17)

Long Beach

7/16/81 Kenneth G. Osborne and Associates

Job #3327-1. Community Professional Bldg., Pacific Coast Hwy. and Termino Avenue, Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 10 feet, southwest of Reservoir Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in pre-Holocene "slope wash" (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (18)

Long Beach

2/26/76 C. Michael SculI in

Project #676115. Lot 9, Tract 6399, 13U9 Bennett, Long Beach.

One trench, 6 feet deep, southwest of Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting

oooo in terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (19)

327 Long Beach

9/15/76 C. Michael SculI in

Project #G76177. Lot 25, Tract

6359, 1356 Ximeno Avenue, Long

Beach.

One trench, 6 feet deep, southwest of Reservoir Hill-Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (20)

552 Long Beach

8/11/77 C. Michael SculI in

Project #77182. «i515 E. Anaheim St., Long Beach.

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of the Reservoir Hill-Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).,

Long Beach (21)

50U Long Beach

6/21/77 A. A. Carrey

Lot No. 3, Tract No. U32«4, Long Beach.

One trench, 8 to 10 feet deep, southwest of Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in Pleistocene San Pedro Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach (22)

6114 Long Beach

1/11/78 C. Michael SculI in

Project #78102. Portion of Farm lot 62, Alamitos Tract, U729 E. Anaheim St., Long Beach

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of Seal Beach fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) File Number

CDMG AP 7-1/2 Fi le Minute
Number Quadra ngle( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report ( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Inqlewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Signal Hill (1)

Long Beach

1/28/79 C. Michael Scull in

Project #79106. Lots 1-U8, block 1, lots 7-2U, 31-U8, block 2, Windermere tract,
southeasterly of Atlantic Ave, and Spring St.

Eight trenches, maximum depth 13 feet, across Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1,2,6: jointing, shearing and calcite filled fractures, but no faulting, in Palos Verdes sand or the upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (2)

Long Beach

11/12/80 LeRoy CrandalI and Associates

Job #AE-80322

Two trenches, maximum depth 9 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg) Trenches 1-2: No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (3) vooo

Long Beach

U/1/79 C. Michael SculI in

Project #79122. Lots 1-8, American Colony Tract, 2800
Atlantic Avenue.

One trench, 6 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of
Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I

Long Beach

8/17/79 C. Michael SculI in

Project #79158. 2699 California Avenue,

One trench, 6 1/2 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of
Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (5)

Long Beach

5/11/79 C. Michael SculI in

Project #79131. Southerly lot
38, lot UO, northerly 1/2 lot U2, Burnett Villa Tract, 1100 Willow Avenue.

One trench, 7 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (6)

Long Beach

1/9/81

Kenneth G. Osborne and Associates

Job #2663-11. Industrial Bldg
Site, westerly side of Gundry Avenue between WiI low and
27th Sts,

One trench, maximum depth 13 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in brown sandy silts or orange brown sands (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP 7-1/2 Fi le Minute Number Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Signal Hill (7)

Long Beach"

6/25/79 C. Michael SculI in

Project #79141. 1400 Willow St. southeasterly corner Willow St. and Gundry Avenue

One trench, maximum depth 7 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (8)

Long Beach

6/1/78 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #99-058. Southwest corner of Willow St. and Walnut Avenue.

Three trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1-3: No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (9)

Long Beach

7/14/78 Baseline Consultants

Project #137-078. Gill property, Cherry Avenue and 25th St.

vo o
Signal Hill (10)

One trench, 8 to 17 feet deep, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach

6/16/78 H. V. Lawmaster and Co., Inc.

File No. 584G. Proposed apartment complex, southeasterly of intersection of Burnett St. and Gaviota Ave.

Two trenches, maximum depth 20 1/2 feet, across Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits and Palos Verde sand of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (11)

Long Beach

1/31/80 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #468-010. Wong Property, 2542 Brayton Avenue.

Signal Hill (12)

One trench, 8 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach

1/25/78 C. Michael SculI in

Project #78105. Portion of lot 102, American Colony Tract, 2286 Gaviota Avenue.

One trench, 6 1/2 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of
Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP
File
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rangle(s)

Date of Invest igating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Signal Hill (13)

Long Beach

3/26/79 C. Michael Scull in

Project #79120. Portion of lot 102, American Colony Tract, 2160 - 2258 Gaviota Avenue
(Tract 36087).

Signal Hi II (1U)

Two trenches, maximum depth 8 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1-2: No faulting in terrace deposits of upper Pleistocene Lakewood
Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Long Beach

8/1/79 C. Michael Scull in

Project #79155. Lots 'B'
5 and 6, Tract 3593, 2298 Rose Avenue.

One trench, maximum depth 9 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill

Long Beach

5/21/78 Baseline Consultants, I nc.

Project #95-058. B and B Property, Cherry Avenue and Hill Street.

One trench, unspecified depth, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi II (16)

Long Beach

10/18/79 C. Michael Scull in

Project #79171. Tentative Tract 36810, 2001 21st St.

Two trenches, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg) No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi II (17)

Long Beach

9/7/79 C. Michael SculI in

Project #79163. Tentative Tract 37297, 2121 Hi I I St.

One trench, maximum depth 12 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg) No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (18)

Long Beach

7/27/77 H. V. Lawmaster and Co., Inc.

File No. 77-515G. 15+ Acre site located southerly of Willow St. and easterly of Junipero Avenue.

Eight trenches, 3 to 5 feet deep, across Pickler and Northeast Flank faults (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1-8: No faulting in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation or the underlying lower Pleistocene San Pedro Formation (Qt and
Qm of Jennings, 1962).

County
(City)
of Jurisdict ion

County
(City) Fi le
Number

CDMG AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rang I e( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Signal Hi II (19)

Long Beach

7/27/79 Baseline Consultants

Project #3U8-079. Proposed Development, 2330 Junipero Avenue.

One trench, 8 feet deep, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in Pleistocene sandstones (Qm or Qt of Jennings, f962).

Signal Hill (20)

Long Beach

7/6/79 Ha r ley Tucker, Inc.

Project #287-79. Lot 1U, Tract 27021, Molino Avenue.

Four trenches, maximum depth 15 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1-U: No faulting in lower Pleistocene San Pedro
Formation (Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (21)

Long Beach

9/U/81 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #855-081. Papadakis property, 2735 Hi I I St.

One trench, 6 1/2 feet deep, southwest of Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qm or Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (22)

Long Beach

6/20/80 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #562-060. Hugh Seed Property, Ohio Avenue, south of Hill Street.

One trench, 6 feet deep, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in terrace sands of Lakewood Formation (Qm or Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (23)

Long Beach

7/7/80 C. Michael SculI in

2070 Stanley Avenue

One trench, 6 1/2 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi II (24)

Long Beach

3/7/79 Converse Ward Davis Dixon

Project #79-2107-01. Lots 63 and 6U of lot 5, (off) Terrace
D r i ve.

Three trenches, 5 to 10 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Trenches 1-3: No faulting in terrace deposits (Qt or Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (25)

Long Beach

9/7/79 C. Michael SculI in

Project #79162. 1995 Molino Avenue.

One trench, maximum depth 12 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) File Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Signal Hill (26)

Long Beach"

7/25/78 Baseline Consultants

Project #140-078. Band B property, 20th St.

One trench, maximum depth 14 1/2 feet, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of
Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (27)

Long Beach

U/25/79 Robert Stone and Associates

Job #1392-00. Proposed Signal Hills Condominiums, Portion of
Tract No. 35227, 1903 Temple St.

One trench, unspecified depth, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in sedimentary deposits of upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (28)

Long Beach

8/12/80 William R. Munson

Portion of lots U and 5, Catalina Street Tract,
2099 Temple St.

vo to

One trench, 6 to 7 1/2 feet deep, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). Steeply dipping fractures, but no faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace

deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (29)

Long Beach

4/1/78 John D. MerriI I

Project #814444. Lots 1,2 and
3, Price Peterson Tract, Temple Avenue - 20th St.

One trench, 6 to 15 feet deep, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (30)

Long Beach

12/28/79 C. Michael Scull in

Project #79179. Lot 9, SignaI Hill Tract, 2051 Orizaba Avenue.

Two trenches, maximum depth 8 1/2 feet, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg) No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lrkewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (31)

Long Beach

12/20/78 Baseline Consultants

Project #228-128. Hill and Hall property, N.E.C. 20th St. and Orizaba Avenue.

One trench, 10 feet deep, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (32)

Long Beach

10/15/80 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #656-090. T.W.C. Project, 1980 Obispo Ave.

One trench, maximum depth 14 feet, southwest of Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in Quaternary terrace deposits (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City)
Fi le Number

CDMG AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rangle(s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

Inqlewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-23)

Signal Hill (33)

Long Beach

3/7/79 C. Michael SculI in

Project #79110. Lots 10-1U, El I is Tract, 3399 19th St.

One trench, maximum depth 9 feet, across Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg).
No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (34)

Long Beach

5/U/79 Baseline Consultants, Inc.

Project #300-OU9. Hammond and Seed Property, 19th St., east of Temple Avenue.

One trench, 8 to 10 feet deep, southwest of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene sands (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (33)

Long Beach

11/29/78 C. Michael SculI in

Project #78182. Lot 11, Hunt Villa Tract, 3300 19th St.

Two trenches, maximum depth 7 feet, southwest of Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg) No faulting in terrace deposits of upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hill (36)

191 Long Beach

9/1U/78 C. Michael SculI in

Project #78158. Lots 8-13 and westerly 30 feet of lots 1U-16, Therberts Tract, 1830 Redondo Avenue.

Two trenches, maximum 7 feet deep, southwest of Northeast Flank fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in terrace deposits of upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Signal Hi I I (37)

Long Beach

12/12/77 C. Michael SculI in

Project #7722U. Portion of lot 2UB, Hunt Villa Tract, 19th St. and Obispo Avenue.

One trench, 6 to 7 feet deep, northeast of Cherry Hill fault (CDMG, 1976gg). No faulting in upper Pleistocene terrace deposits of Lakewood Formation
(Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Huntington (1) UOO Sea I Beach Beach

1/2U/77 John D. MerriI I

Project #63U75. Unit 1, Tract 9168, Huntington Harbour.

One trench, 19 feet deep, across South Branch of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in Holocene deposits (Qal of Jennings, 1962). Seismic pro-
filing showed the fault to disrupt sediments 60 feet beneath the site.

Huntington (2) 379 Seal Beach Beach

12/10/76 Earth Research Associates, Inc.

Job #32U-76. Parcel U, Block 182, 16692 Dolores Street.

One trench, maximum depth 13 feet, northeast of North Branch of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in Pleistocene terrace deposits (Qm of Jennings,
1962).

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) File Number

CDMG
AP File Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rang I e( s)

Date of Investigating Report(s) Fi rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Ing Iewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Huntington (3) 209 Seal Beach Beach

U/7/76

H.V. Lav/master
and Company, Inc.

File No. 76-379G-A. Proposed Apartment Complex, 16672 Algonquin Street.

One trench, maximum depth 9 1/2 feet, southwest of North Branch of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in silty sands, silty clays or buff marl (Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Huntington (U) 31U Seal Beach Beach

7/28/76 H.V. Lawmaster and Company, Inc.

File No. 76-U1UG. Site of
proposed Apartment Buildings, 168U1 and 16851 Lynn Street.

One trench, 11 feet deep, northeast of North Branch of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in late Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Huntington (5) Beach

Seal Beach

7/29/76 H.V. Lawmaster and Company, Inc.

File No. 76-U16G. Proposed
Apartment Building, 1683U Blanton Street.

vmo

One trench, 15 feet deep, northeast of North Branch of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in late Pleistocene Lakewood Formtion (Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Huntington (6) 208 Seal Beach Beach

U/7/76 H.V. Lawmaster and Company, Inc.

File No. 76-378G-A. Proposed Apartment Complex, 16822 Sims
Street.

One trench, maximum depth 12 1/2 feet, northeast of North Branch of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faujting in silty clays, silty sands or greenish
brown marly siltstones (Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Huntington (7) Beach

Sea I Beach

8/10/79 Baseline Consultants

Project #357-079. Curt is Development Project, Warner Avenue.

One trench, maximum depth 15 feet, northeast of Bolsa-Fairview fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Huntington (8) 399 Sea I Beach Beach

10/15/76 Terratech, Inc.

Project #1883. Unit 1, Tract 8636, Huntington Har-
bour.

One trench, 19 feet deep, northeast of South Branch of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in "Holocene deposits" (Qm of Jennings, 1962).

Huntington (9) 39U Seal Beach Beach

10/28/76 Earth Research Associates, Inc.

Job #27U-76. Proposed Apartment Complex, Bolsa Chica Rd. South of Warner Street.

Three trenches, 10 to 12 feet deep, northeast of North Branch of Inglewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). Trenches 1-3: No faulting in Pleistocene terrace deposits
(Qm of Jennings, 1962).

County
(City) of
Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP
Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

IngJewood-Newport Fault Zone. Los Angeles and Orange Counties (Figs. 22-25)

Hunt ington (10) 2U7 Sea I Beach Beach

U/2/76 Supple-
ment 6/25/76

Irv i ne So i I s Engineering and
Testing Laboratory

Job #102M-9U. Tracts 8630, 8893 and 889U, Graham Street and Slater Avenue.

One trench, unspecified depth, northeast of North Branch of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in "Holocene alluvium" (Qt of Jennings, 1962).

Huntlngton (ID 250 Sea I Beach Beach

6/22/76 H.V. Lawmaster and Company, Inc.

File No. 76-UOUG. Tract No,
7635: Lot Nos. 32,33,3U,35 and 37, near Talbert Avenue and Edwards Street.

Three trenches, 15 feet deep, across North Branch of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). Trenches 1-3: No faulting in "lower Pleistocene San Pedro Formation" or
Holocene alluvium (Qt and QaI of Rogers, 1965).

Huntington (12) Beach

Sea I Beach

9/20/7U Dames and Moore

Job #6192-001-02. Seacliff Village, Huntington Beach Company.

vo One trench, 10 feet deep, across projected trace of Ing Iewood-Newport fault (CDMG, 1976qq). No faulting in upper Pleistocene Lakewood Formation (Qt of Rogers, 1965)

Seal Beach

(D

Seal Beach

U/30/80 MedaI 11, Aragon, revised Worswick & Assoc. 12/1U/81

Project #S1753C

Trenches across 20 ft. wide zone of discontinuous strata along Seal Beach fault.
Silt greater than 125,000 years old displaced at least a few feet; 35,000-50,000 year old paleosol displaced a few inches. Modern solum probably younger than
15,000 to 20,000 years old contains a few small cracks.

CF: Chino Fault: MHSF: Murrieta Hot Springs Fault
Fig. 26 - Locations of engineering geology reports along strands of Elsinore fault zone by Riverside County number. See Fig. 1 for location and Fig. 2 for explanation of symbols.

County (City)
of Jurisdiction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le Number

7-1/2 Minute Quadrangle! s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report ( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Elsinore Fault Zone. Riverside County (Fig. 26)

Riverside

H

Temecula, Pechanga

7/10/73 F. Beach Leighton and Associates

Job #73222

Trenches, 8-13 feet deep, across strands of Wolf Valley fauft zone (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980f,a) and Willard fault zone (Envicom, 1976). Near vertical joints with no offset in alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977) across strand of Wolf Valley fault in southernmost trenches. Fault cuts old terrace deposits (Pauba Formation, Qps, Kennedy, 1977) and does not displace alluvium along possible northern extension of Wolf Valley fault or strand of Willard fault (Envicom, 1976).

Rivers ide

22

Murrieta

11/29/74 Murphy, M.A. rev. and Associates 7/12/75

Revised specific plan 103-C/W

vo

Riverside

44

00

Trenches, average depth 5-7 feet, across Murrieta Hot Springs fault (Kennedy, "Fractures" in "Temecula Arkose" (Qus and Qps, Kennedy, 1977); no faulting in floodplain sediments (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

Murrieta

2/13/76 Earth Research Associates, Inc,

Trenches, depth 7-14 feet, across Murrieta Hot Springs fault (Kennedy, 1977). Gouge zones, in unnamed pre-Pauba Formation (Qus, Kennedy, 1977); no faulting in alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

Rivers ide

45

Corona South, 2/13/76 Pioneer Consultants Lake Mathews

Job #2316-001

Riverside

69

R ivers ide

70

Trenches to a depth of 12 feet across strands of Glen Ivy North fault (Weber, 1977; CDMG, 1980c,g.) Fault gouge and slickensides reported in older fan deposits (Qof, Weber, 1977). "Rift valley" (30 ft. deep, 100 ft. wide); water line in vicinity of Hunt Road requires annual repair; may be caused by continuous creep; parallel cracks in asphalt of Lawson Road.

Corona South 3/22/77 Pioneer Consultants

Job #2466-001

Trenches up to 10 feet deep across Chino fault (Weber, 1977; CDMG, 1980c). Consultant reported that Chino fault cuts alluvium (Qsc or Qof, Weber, 1977) in three trenches. The structures observed were dismissed as sedimentary features by Tony Brown (Riverside County geologist) upon examination of trenches in neighboring sites GR-72 and 105.

Temecula

3/21/75 Pioneer Consultants

Job #1208-095

Trenches, depth 12-14 feet, across strand of Willard fault (Kennedy, 1977). No faulting in alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

County (City)
of
Juri sd iction

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quad rang le( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report ( s) F i rm or
(Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Elsinore Fault Zone. Riverside County (Fig. 26)

Riverside

72

Corona South

3/15/77 C. Michael Scull in

Project #77129

Trenches up to 10 feet deep west of Chino fault (Weber, 1977; CDMG, 1980c); no faulting in old alluvium (Qsc and Qof, Weber, 1977).

Riverside

79

WiIdomar

5/20/77 LeRoy E. Rand

Parcel Map No. 9070

Trench average depth 7 feet, northeast of Willard fault (Kennedy, 1977). No faulting in alluvial fan debris (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside

Wi Idomar

6/29/77 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #31-77-6

vo

vo

Riverside

102

Three trenches, average depth 9 feet, across three strands of Wi Idomar fault zone
(Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980h). No faulting in Pauba Formation (Quc and Qps, Kennedy, 1977) northernmost trench. "North Branch of WiIdomar fault displaces Pauba Formation within three feet of surface in middle trench. South Branch of WiIdomar fault displaces Pauba Formation within one foot of surface in southernmost trench. Property is located directly southeast of closed topographic depression within WiIdomar fault zone.

EIs i no re

11/114/77 J.F. Stickel fie Assoc.

Job #1877-001

Trench, average depth 12 feet, in Willard fault zone (Weber, 1977). No faulting in alluvium (Qiv and Qif, Weber, 1977).

Riverside

105

Corona North

12/17/77 C. Michael Scull in

Project #77217

Trenches up to 9 feet across Chino fault (Weber, 1977); no faulting in colluvim and old alluvium (Qsc and Qof, Weber, 1977).

Riverside

107

AlberhiI I, EIs i no re

12/1/77 J.F. Stickel fie Assoc.

Job #1918-001

Trenches, average depth 13 feet, across strand of Glen Ivy North fault (Weber, 1977; CDMG, 1980e,b). No faulting in alluvium (Qiv, Weber, 1977).

Riverside

118

AlberhiI I

U/11/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #52-78-3

Trench, average depth 10 feet, across strand of Willard fault (Weber, 1977); no faulting in floodplain and valley fill (Qiv, Weber, 1977).

Riverside

122

AlberhiI I

5/25/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #54-78-3

Trenches, average depth 9 feet, across possible strand of Glen Ivy North fault (Weber, 1977; CDMG, 1980e); no faulting in Pauba Formation and floodplain and
valley fill (Qp and Qov, Weber, 1977).

County (C i ty)
of Jurisdict ion

County (City) Fi le Number

CDMG
AP File Number

7-1/2 Minute
Quadrangle( s)

Date of Investigat ing Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geologist

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

El si no re Fault Zone. Riverside County (Fig... 26)

Riverside

1U1 1148

Murrieta

U/22/80 F. Beach Leighton and Associates

Job #67837-03

Trenches, depths 7-11 feet, across trace of Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG,
1980d). Possible fault in alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977). Evidence presented for slightly different location than that shown by Kennedy.

Riverside

1U3

AI be rh iI I

8/22/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #66-78-8

Trench, average depth 9 feet, across strand of Wi.llard fault (Weber, 1977). No faulting in alluvium (Qiv, Weber, 1977).

R i ve rs i de

Murrieta

9/6/78 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #68-78-9

Trench, average depth 10 feet, across possible strand of Willard fault (Envicom, 1976). No faulting in alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

R i ve rs i de

179

AI be rh iI I

U/25/79 C. Michael Scull in

Job #79125

Oo

Trenches up to 12 feet deep across trace of unnamed fault (Weber, 1977) parallel to and about one-half mile north of Glen Ivy North fault. Fault gouge reported in older

alluvium (Qov, Weber, 1977); alluvial fan (Qfi) and stream channel deposits (Qsct)

not faulted.

Riverside

186

WiIdomar

7/8/79 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #79-79-7

Trench, average depth 9 feet, across branch of Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980h). No faulting in Pauba Formation (Qps, Kennedy, 177).

Riverside

190-S

Murrieta

3/7/78 F. Beach Leighton and Associates

Job #6780U3-01

Trenches, 5-8 feet deep, across Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980d). Alluvium faulted against Pauba Formation (Qal and Qps, Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside

19U 1150

Temecula

2/7/80 Kenneth G. Osborne & Assoc.

Job #2888-1,5,11

Trenches, depth 5-13 feet, across Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980f). Fault separates Pauba Formation and alluvium (Qps and Qal, Kennedy, 1977). Pavement along Ynez Road (west of site) disturbed along alignment of Wildomar fault.

Riverside

197

Murrieta

12/1U/79 James P. McGoldrick, Con. Eng.

Parcel Map NO.136U8

Seven trenches, maximum depth 15 feet, northeast and across Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980d). Trench 1: we I I-developed, iron-stained reverse fault plane offsetting Temecula (?) and possibly Pauba (?) Formations (Qt and Qp, Kennedy, 1977).
No faulting in overlying alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

County (City)
of Jurisd let ion

County (City) File Number

CDMG AP Fi le
Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Invest igat ing Report( s) F i rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and Site Description Where no
City or County Number

Elsinore Fault Zone. Riverside County (Fig..26)

Riverside

199 1192

Pechanga

6/13/80 Pioneer Consultants

Job #1208-159

Nineteen trenches across Wildomar fault zone (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980a). Trenches 1,7,8,11,12,13,14: faulted alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977). Trench U: faulting in Pauba Formation but no offset in Recent colluvial topsoil (Qp and Qal, Kennedy, 1977). Trench 15: faulting in Pauba Formation and overlying alluvium (Qp and Qal, Kennedy, 1977). Trench 6: Pauba (?) Formation extensively faulted but displayed lack of shear zones and gouge formation (Qp, Kennedy, 1977).

Rivers ide

202 1232

Murrieta

1/19/79 Pioneer Consultants

Job #1208-156,157, 158,159

Two trenches, 12-15 feet deep, across strands of Willard fault (Envicom, 1976). No faulting in alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside

216 1247

Murrieta

7/79

Fugro, Inc.

Project #79-233-01

Four trenches averaging 10 feet deep across Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980d). Trench 3: fault "abruptly terminating and offsetting a sand/silt, ironstained contact in alluvium" (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside

218 1269

Murrieta

7/79

Fugro, Inc.

Project #79-233-00

Trenches 10-12 feet deep northeast of Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980d); no faulting in alluvial overbank and floodplain deposits (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside

219 1216

Murrieta

8/1/80

F. Beach Leighton and Associates

Project #680073-01

Trench, average depth 6 feet, northeast of Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977); no faulting in Pauba sandstone (Qps, Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside

221-S 1232

Pechanga

10/1/79 Pioneer Consultants

Job #3234-001

Trench 5-10 feet deep across concealed trace of Wildomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980a). Down-dragging and offsetting of a throughgoing clay layer in alluvium interpreted as resulting from a high-angle reverse fault (Qal, Kennedy, 1977)

Riverside

225 12UU

AI be rh iI I

7/21/80 C. Michael Scull in

Project #80139

Twelve trenches, 5-15 feet deep, across Glen Ivy North fault (Weber, 1977; CDMG, 1980e). Reverse faulting in trenches 1-3 thrusts older granodiorite over younger dark fan deposits (Kgr and Qof of Weber, 1977). Fault marked by 3-6 inch wide zone of crushed gouge "offset by shears". In trench 2, unfaulted white fan deposits
(Qof, Weber, 1977) overlies the fault.

Riverside

229 1270

Murrieta

10/7/80 G.A. Nicoll and Associates, Inc.

Project #R 2310

One trench, average depth 10 feet, southwest of Wildomar fault (CDMG, 1980d). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Kennedy, 1977).

County
(City) of
Jurisdiction

County
(City) File Number

CDMG
AP File Number

7-1/2 Minute Quad rang le( s)

Date of Investigating Report( s) F I rm or (Mo/da/yr) Geolog i st

Identification Number and
Site Description Where no City or County Number

Elsinore Fault Zone. Riverside County (Fiq. 26)

Richard D. Merker

Tentative PM 16615

"Shallow trench" southwest of Glen Ivy North fault (Weber, 1977; CDMG, 1980e) No fault in extremely deformed and gouged metamorphosed shale bedrock (Jb, Weber, 1977)

Riverside

2U9

Wi Idomar

7/21/81 G.A. NicolI and Assoc., Inc.

Project #R2U67

Four trenches, 6 to 12 1/2 feet deep, across trace of WiIdomar fault (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980h). Fault displacement and carbonate-filled fractures in two of the trenches in sandstone (Qus, Kennedy, 1977) unit. Alluvial cover did not appear to contain any fault breaks

Riverside 258 1UU5

Lake Ma thews

1/13/82 Geo-Ekta Laboratories

Tract No. 72UO

Trench, to a maximum depth of 11 feet, across trace of Glen Ivy fault (Weber, 1977;

CDMG, 1980g). Fault location determined by the presence of a three-foot zone

Oro

stained dark red in brownish-gray alluvial deposits (Qv, Weber, 1977). Slickensides and inclined cobbles reported in fault zone.

Riverside 260 1329

Wi Idomar

11/27/81 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #93-81-11

Trench, maximum depth 71/2 feet, southwest of WiIdomar fault zone (Kennedy, 1977; CDMG, 1980h). No faulting in alluvium (Qal, Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside 263 1U60

Murrieta, Temecula

3/17/82 Leighton and Associates, Inc.

Project #6820059-01

Five trenches, 6-7 feet deep, across and northeast of WiIdomar fault (CDMG, 1980d,f). Trenches T-1 and T-U: faulting in Pleistocene Pauba Formation (Qps of Kennedy, 1977)

Riverside 267 1U83

Murrieta

8/8/81 Lewis S. Lohr

Job #89-81-07

Two trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, southwest of WiIdomar fault (CDMG, 1980d). No faulting in Holocene alluvium (Qal of Kennedy, 1977).

Riverside 270 151U

EI s i no re

10/31/82 California GeoTek, Inc.

Project #65UW20-01

Four trenches, maximum depth 10 feet, across subsidiary of WiIdomar fault (CDMG, 1980b). Trenches 1,M: faulting in Holocene alluvium (Ql of Weber, 1977).

REFERENCES

State of California Special Studies Zones 7-1/2 minute quadrangles;

CDMG (19741) CDMG (1974J) CDMG (1974k) CDMG (19741) CDMG (1974m) CDMG (1974n) CDMG (1974p)
CDMG (1974q) CDMG (1974r) CDMG (1974s) CDMG (1974t) CDMG (1974u) CDMG (1974x) CDMG (1974cc) CDMG (1974dd)
CDMG (1974ee) CDMG (1974ff) CDMG (1974jj) CDMG (1974kk) CDMG (197411) CDMG (1974mm) CDMG (1974nn) CDMG (1974oo)
CDMG (1974pp) CDMG (1976gg) CDMG (1976hh) CDMG (1976ii) CDMG (1976qq) CDMG (1976vv) CDMG (1976ww) CDMG (1977w) CDMG (1977rr) CDMG (1977tt) CDMG (1979v) CDMG (1979y) CDMG (1979z) CDMG (1979aa) CDMG (1979bb) CDMG (1979ss)
CDMG (1980a) CDMG (1980b) CDMG (1980c) CDMG (1980d) CDMG (1980e) CDMG (1980f) CDMG (1980g) CDMG (1980H) CDMG (19801) CDMG (1980J)

San Jacinto Hemet Sunnymead Lakeview El Casco Seven Palms Valley Idyllwild SE 1/4 Morongo Valley
SW 1/4 Morongo Valley Valyermo Lebec La Liebre Ranch Lake Hughes Juniper Hills Mescal Creek Mount San Antonio Littlerock Cuddy Valley Frazier Mountain Sawmill Mountain Devore San Bernardino North Harrison Mountain SW 1/4 San Gorgonio Mountain Long Beach Hollywood Inglewood Seal Beach SW 1/4 Breckenridge Mountain Rio Bravo Ranch Mount Wilson Redlands San Bernardino South San Fernando Del Sur Sleepy Valley Ritter Ridge Palmdale Yucaipa Pechanga Elsinore Corona South Murrieta Alberhill Temecula Lake Mathews Wildomar San Jacinto Hemet

103

CDMG (1980n) Seven Palms Valley CDMG (1980o) Desert Hot Springs
Barrows, A.G., 1979a, Geologic map of the San Andreas fault zone and adjoining terrane, Juniper Hills and vicinity, Los Angeles County, California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Open-File Report 80-2 LA.
Barrows, A.G., 1979b, Geology and fault activity of the Valyermo segment of the San Andreas fault zone, Los Angeles County, California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Open-File Report 79-1 LA, part 1, 49 p.
Barrows, A.G., Kahle, J.E., and Beeby, D.J., 1976, Geology and fault activity pf the Palmdale segment of the San Andreas fault zone, Los Angeles County, California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Open-File Report 76-6 LA, 30 p.
Barrows, A.G., Kahle, J.E., Saul, R.B., and Weber, F.H., Jr., 1974, Geologic map of the San Fernando earthquake area: in Oakeshott, G.B., ed., 1975, San Fernando, California, earthquake of 9 February 1971: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Bulletin 196, 463 p.
Beeby, D.J., 1979, Geology and fault activity of the Lake Hughes segment of the San Andreas fault zone, Los Angeles County, California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Open-File Report 79-2 LA, part 2, 35 p.
Envicom, 1976, Riverside County Seismic Safety Element.
Jennings, C.W., 1962, Geologic map of California, Long Beach sheet: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol.
Jennings, C.W., and Strand, R.G., 1969, Geologic map of California, Los Angeles sheet: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol.
Hart, E.W., 1980, Fault-rupture hazard zones in California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Spec. Publ. 42, 25 p.
Kahle, J.E., Smith, D.P., and Beeby, D.J., 1975, Annotated fault map of the Leona Valley segment, San Andreas fault zone, Los Angeles County, California: in Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Geology of the Leona Valley segment of the San Andreas fault zone, Los Angeles County, California, Open-File Report 77-2 LA.
Kennedy, M.P., 1977, Recency and character of faulting along the Elsinore fault zone in southern Riverside County, California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Spec. Report 131, 12 p.
Lo, W.Y.C., and J.G. Moreno, 1980, State of California index to geologic reports for sites within Special Studies Zones: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Open-File Report OFR 77-6SF, revised August 1980.
Rogers, T.H., 1965, Geologic map of California, Santa Ana sheet: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol.
104

Rogers, T.H., 1967, Geologic map of California, San Bernardino sheet: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol.
Sharp. R.V., 1972, Map showing recently active breaks along the San Jacinto fault zone between San Bernardino and Borrego Valley, California: U.S. Geological Survey, Map 1-675.
Smith, A. R., 1964, Geologic map of California, Bakersfield sheet: Calif, Div. Mines and Geol.
Weber, F.H., Jr., 1977, Seismic hazards related to geologic factors, Elsinore and Chino fault zones, northwestern Riverside County, California: Calif. Div. Mines and Geol., Open-File Report 77-4 LA, 96 p.
Ziony, J.I., Wentworth, C.M., and Buchanan, J.M., 1973, Recency of faulting: A widely applicable criterion for assessing the activity of faults: in Fifth World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Rome 1973.
105

