UNITZD STATES DEPASTMPUT OF GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

J-} V

Some copper deposits in the Old Hat aiining district, PIIPa County, Arizona
P. Peterson S. C. Creasey

Open files September 21, l olH.

pare Introduction ........................................................... 1 Flstory and production ................................................. 1 Geology................................................................ 3 Ore deposits ........................................................... 5
General statement ................................................. 5 Ore control ...................................................... 5 Mineralogy........................................................ 6 Reserves............................................................... 6 Vines.................. ............................................... g Dally mine ........................................................ g Geesman mine...................................................... 9 Hartman-Home stake mine ............................................ 9 Leatherwood property.............................................. 9 Stratton property................................................. 10 Corregldor scheellte claim........................................ 10 T»ecoirtTT»endations for prospecting and exploration ....................... 10
-U

ILLUSTRATIONS
yaps accompanying text
Topographic and geologic r*ap of the Control Area. Phelps Dod«e drift» Geeswan mine. 100-foot level, Geesman mine. ?00-foot level, Geesman mine. 250-foot level. Geeswan mine. Daily mine. Topographic and geologic nap, sections and workings, Fartman property. Tooographic and geologic ntap, sections and workings, Stratton property. Topographic and geologic rap, sections and workings, Leatherwood oroperty. Section A-A*. Section B-B». Section C-C 1 . Section D-D 1 . Section B-2 1 . Section y-3". Claim map of the Control area.
Figurei page
1. Index map....................................................... 2 2. Control Mines, Inc., copper production 19^1, 1PU?......... ..... U 1. Reconnaissance ir«ap of the Control and adjacent areas............ 7
ii

Some coprer deposits in the Old Hat mining district,
Piira County, Arizona.
Introduction
Trom August ?0. l^U?, to January ?0, 19^ f » field party of the Geological Surrey, United States Department of the Interior, studied a part of the Old Hat mining district, in the Santa Otalina Vonntains, Arizona. The area maoped (flg.l) is about 25 miles north-northeast of Tucson, in T. 11 S, , R 16 E., Gila and Salt River meridian, in the northeast corner of Piira County. It irsy be reached from Oracle, Arizona, by way of 35 miles of oiled road and ?5 miles of graded dirt road. The topography of the are* is nigged, with altitudes ranging from about 5^00to 7700 feet, and it is largely occupied by a single hill whose sumcit lies a little east of Oracle Ridge.
The principal object of the work WPS to find additional reserves of copper though an outlying scheelite prosoect at the south end of the area also wat examined. 'Hie work was done chiefly by *Tels P. Peterson and S. C. Creasey, with the assistance for short periods of J. B. Hadley and F. F. Sullwold, Jr. The United States Bureau of fines furnished a survey that facilitated napping the Geesman nine, and Hldred Wilson of the Arizona "^hirpau of Vines furnished a partially completed geologic map of the Dallv pine that was helpful. Individual property owners assisted in nary ways that cannot be adermately acknowledged.
History and production
There is no record of oroduction previous to August, 1^7, when the Catalina Consolidated Copper Cornpany leased the Camp Apache group of claims and the adjoining property of the Daily Arizona Consolidated ^pper Company. The Cfttalina Consolidated built a 90-ton flotation concentrating rill on the property of the Daily Arizona Consolidated Copper Company and mined and treated ore from both the Geesman and' Daily properties. From August 15, 19^7 until the close of their operations in Vay. 1°3S, this company treated approximately 13,000 tons of ore averaging 2. f% copper.
In October, l^TQ, the Control l/ines. Inc. bought the Consolidated mill and leased the Daily Arizona property. Thev acquired the Geesman property in the spring of 19UO fron the Phelps Dodge Corporption. In 19^0, the Control Vines Inc. nv'ned and milled from the Geesman and Dally properties ?U,000 tons of ore which yielded about 1*^9^,000 pounds of copper. The table (fig.?) gives the production figures for the Control Vines, Inc. for the year 10^1 and through September of
The Geesmpn rr»ine is the only active mine in the district at the present tirr>e. It is operating with a personnel of from 30 to Uo men which includes the mill operators. The Daily mine, owned by the Daily Mines Corpnny, was active in 1939 and 19^ while under lease to the Control Vines, Inc. The
-1-

\
£>

owners have recently stated their Intention to reonen the Pine In the n**ar future.
Geology
The mines and orospects In the area all lie near the border of a mass of marble that Is. about a mile and a ouarter In length from ea-t to west and about three-quarters of a mile wide. It Is mostly from this rock that the hill Just mentioned is carved, though the summit consists of a small ovrlyin* mass of quartzite. On the west, northwest, and southwest the rarble is in contact, partly faulted, with an underlying series of metamorphosed sedimentary rocks that consists chiefly of quartzlte, sandstone, and Impure limestone but includes a little shale. Igneous rocks, mainly dloritic, have been intruded Into all the sedimentary strata.
The formations beneath the "-arble hare not been positively identified. They are believed, however, to include the ore-Cambrian Dripping Storings quartzite, represented by passive slabby sandstone and quartzite interbedded with shale which has been metamorphosed to siliceous hornfels and chlorltic schist. They probably include, also, the Meseal limestone, of nre-Cambrlan age, and a small thickness of the Cambrian Troy cuartzlte.
The marble fornlng the knob is massive and coarsely crystalline, and its original textures have been almost wholly obliterated by metaRorphism. Its age Is probably Paleozoic, and its #ener*l appearance indicates that its lower part may be Mississippi an and its upper part Pennsylvania^ At any rate, it is older than the igneous rocks, which are Intrusive into it, and is altered along the intrusive contacts to tactlte, which consists mainly of brown garnet, epidote, and quartz. The tactite is mapped separately on the detailed maps but not in figure 2.
The intrusive igneous rocks Include hornblende-diorite, hornblendequartz diorite, and diabase, but these varieties are not distinguished from one another on any of the maps. Small masses of diorite and diabase, most of them sills but some of them dikes, have been injected into the marble.. The main intrusive contact between the diorite and the marble tends to follow the bedding, but In detail it is v«ry irregular, with numerous rolls, and rany tongues of diorite cut across the bedding. Closely associated with the tartite is a rock that is believed to be an altered fades of the diorite, because it grades into unaltered diorite and partly resembles It in texture. At least some of the diabase is much later than the diorite.
In its eastern p*rt the irarble is immediately underlain by the diorite. On the south and east sides of the marble mass, the contact has a low dip from 10° to 18° but along parts of the north side the dip becomes as steep as 60°. Dikes of diabase cut the diorite as well as th* marble and the tactlte, and a diabase dike of low dip crosses the Geesman ore body.
The principal structures in the marble are a series of east to northeast striking anticlines and synclines, which apparently have not controlled the
-3-

2/7 . 7* 2 77
.£ 7/0 7S
/3S .

4 70
77
?/
'7S

// f. //J .

/As of

/0S. 0000

, ?97

Figure

-U-

localization of the ore. Faulting is subordinate to folding; only a few small faults of measurable displacement were recognized. Fracturing is common; northeast-striking fractures predominate, but northwest-striking fractures occur also.
The predominant structure in the pre-Cambrian rocks is a series of northeast-striking faults, which are younger than the Paleozoic marbles. The strike and dip of the rocks are in general fairly uniform, apart from folding near the faults. A mineralized fault zone striking about north-northeast forms part of the boundary between the Misslssippian (?) and older rocks at the Hartman mine. Northwest-striking tension fractures are common in both the Hartman and the Stratton workings.
Ore deposits
All of the ore deposits are in the metamorphosed sedimentary rocks near/the diorite contact, the mineralization being of the pyrometasomatic type, commonly called contact-metamorphic. No two of the deposits, however, are altogether similar in their relations to both country rock and structure.
Ore control. The Daily and Gessman deposits, on the northeast slope of the marble hill, are both in a well-defined zone of tactite between the supposedly Uississippian marble and diorite. The ore shoots in the Daily nine are localized along the crests and flanks of three small rolls, of ridge-like form, on the marble-diorite contact, which here dips northwestward at a low angle. The rolls are no more than wrinkles in the surface of contact apparently unrelated to any major structures in the limestone. The localization of the ore in the rolls is probably due to minor fractures in the tactite along their axes. Iri the Geesman mine, the nature of the ?tructural control determining the position of the ore is not entirely clear. Apparently, however, the ore shoot is Realized in a recess limited below by a shallow, steeply pitching trough in the diorite contact forming the footwall, and above by an irregular tongue of diorite that extends from the main intrusive mass into the marble. Little evidence remains of any major fractures that may have influenced the mineralization; if such fractures once were present they have been almost completely healed. Faint traces of rather persistent north-south fractures are indeed visible in the stopes, but they are not associated with especially rich ore; in places, on the contrary, they are marked by silicified ribs that are poorly mineralized.
At the Hartman-Homestake workings, on the northwest side of the hill, both the Mississippian (?) marble and the older sedimentary rocks are exposed. The outer parts of the adits are thought to be in the Dripping Springs quartzite. Diorite crops out northwest of the workings, but the workings do not reach the intrusive contact. The metamorphic effect of the diorite is shown, however, by the fact that the marble in this vicinity is partially altered to tactite. Ore minerals are disseminated in a bed of garnetized limestone that is apparently at the base of the Uississippian (?) marble, but they are not abundant enough to make ore. Stronger mineralization has taken place in both the Mississippian (?) and the older rocks, along the fault zone striking N. 70° E and dipping southward, and also along minor northwest-striking cross fractures.
-5-

The Stratton workings, on the south side of the marble hill, are apnarently all in the rocks underlying the marble. They are several hundred feet from the main body of diorite, but the rocks are highly metamorphosed* Mineralization has occurred in tactite, or garnet rock, formed by alteration of the Mescal (?) limestone. The mineralizing solutions appear to have risen along fault fissures of easterly to northeasterly strike*
The Leatherwood workings, on the southwest side of the marble hill, are all close to the diorite contact and partly in the diorite. The mineralization is mainly in tactite, which appears to be altered Mescal limestone.
The Corregidor scheelite prospect, at the south end of the area shown in figure 2, is in quartzite, presumably of the older series, near its contact with intrusive diorite.
Mineralogy. The dominant ore mineral in the Daily, Geesman, and Stratton mines is chalcopyrito, which is accompanied by subordinate amounts of bornite and chalcocite and a little pyrite and magnetite. The gangue consists of brown to red garnet, epidote, and quartz. In the Hartman mine, chalcopyrite, galena, and sphalerite are enclosed in a gangue consisting of siliceous hornfels, pyritebearing chlorite schist, and a little brown garnet. The oxidized zone is very shallow, sulfides being found in many shallow prospect pits within 10 feet of the surface. Little secondary enrichment has occurred. Oxidation is most in evidence at the Leatherwood mine, from which a little oxide ore has been shipped. Considerable magnetite occurs in this property. Scheelite occurs in the Daily and Geesman mines and in the Corregidor prospect, but not, so far as has yet been shown, in any large quantity. A little molybdenite is found on the Stratton property.
Reserves
The minable reserve, in the Daily and Geesman mines together, of measured ore averaging from 3 to U percent copper is estimated to be not over 5,000 tons. A 3 percent cut-off grade is being used by the Control Mines, Inc., because of the high mining costs that result from operating at less than half capacity. If the company continues to produce 30 to 40 tons of ore per day, this reserve will be exhausted in about 6 months. An additional 10,000 tons of inferred ore is estimated to be available in undeveloped ground between the levels of the Geesman mine. Probably a well-organized and well-executed program of development and prospecting could open up enough ore to support continued operations at full capacity (80 to 90 tons per day) for at least as much as a year. Operation at full capacity should make it possible to mine ore of lower grade, with a resulting increase in the minable reserves and in the productive life of the mine.
The reserves of scheelite ore containing more than one percent of WQo that can be mined in the Daily and Geesman workings are estimated to be less than 100 tons, and the minable bodies of scheelite are too discontinuous for extensive mining. The scheelite can probably only be mined at a profit in conjunction with the copper mining and then only along the marble-tactite contact between the P. D. drift and part of the 100-foot l^vel west of the hoisting shaft in the Geesraan mine.
-6-

II II II
Figure 3

/c*^__.»

/if

The Hartman mine is estimated to have, in the fault and fracture zones, reserves of about 8,000 tons of indicated ore plus 15,000 tons of inferred ore, which will average about 2.8 percent copper, 1.2 percent lead, and 8.8 percent zinc. The tactite in this mine does not contain enough copper to be classed as ore. The reserves in the southern mineralized zone on the Stratton property are estimated at 2,000 tons of indicated ore and 8,000 tons of inferred ore. The copper content of the ore exposed for 100 feet in the inclined adit is judged from inspection to Toe between 2 and 3 percent. The most northerly mineralized zone on the Stratton property is estimated to contain about 15,000 tons of mineralized tactite, which may, however, be too poor in copper to be ore.
Mines
Daily mine.--The Daily Mines Company has 17 patented claims, which make up an irregular area trending eastward from the center of the marble mass. Approximately 2,500 feet of merble-diorite contact lies on the property.
The Daily mine workings, reached through an adit driven under the tactite zone, consist of a fairly continuous stope locally subdivided by large pillars. As the stoping followed the mineralized tactite, the elevation of the floor varies irregularly throughout the mine. Practically no development work has been done outside the stope.
The mined ore bodies, which occupied the crests and flanks of three small, gently plunging ridges on the contact, were roughly crescent-shaped. From the size of the old stope, the ground comprising the three ore bodies is estimated to have been about 160 feet, long and 140 feet broad. Their thickness was variable but probably averaged about 10 feet. The ore taken from the Daily mine in 1939 and 1940, when the property was being worked under lease by the Control Mines, Inc., is said to have averaged about 2.95 percent in copper.*
The only measurable reserves in the Daily mine consist of the ore left in the pillars. The chances of finding additional ore down the plunge of the rolls are uncertain. Ore has been followed below the main level, but the workings below that level are now under water, and reports as to what is exposed in the face are conflicting. The ore-bearing horizon along the contact probably rises abruptly northward, however, from the flooded northernmost workings, to emerge on the north edge of the trough-shaped mass of limestone.
Rolls similar to those in the Daily mine occur on the contact north of the mine, and tactite under these rolls shows oxidized copper minerals, which may indicate the presence of ore bodies.
Scheelite has been found in the Daily mine in two small pockets, each estimated to contain less than 10 tons, on the tactite-marble contact at the southeast end of the most northerly roll.
* Oral communication from Newt V/ells, President of Control Mines, Inc.
-8-

Geesman mine. The Oceanian mine is owned and operated by Control Llines, Inc., which holds 15 patented claims north and south of the Daily i&ncc Company's property. The Geesman mine was the only operating mine in the district when the field work was being done.
The mine workings comprise an inclined shaft following the contact zone, three main levels, and two sublevels. The main levels, designated as the 100-, 200-, and 250-foot levels, are 78, 175, and 226 feet respectively below the collar of the shaft. An adit connecting the 100-foot level with the surface serves as the main haulagewoy. The 100-foot level has the most extensive lateral development, with drifts and stopes extending 400 feet east and 500 feet west of the hoisting shaft.
The ore shoot in the Geesman mine pitches from 35° to 50° Sff. It is approximately 200 feet wide, 300 feet long, and from 15 to 20 feet thick. The ore shoot appears to be bottomed east of the hoisting shaft by the junction of. a tongue of diorite with the main mass. The pitch of the junction projected westward would carry it a short distance west of the hoisting shaft, indicating that the ore does not extend far below the floor of the stope.
From January 1940, to the en<J of September 194?, the Geesraan mine produced about 3,200,000 pounds of copper from 52,200 tons of ore containing on the average approximately 3.4 percent of copper.
Sporadic traces of scheelite are found throughout the Geesman mine, but the only places where scheelite ore can possibly be mined are along the tactitemarble contact in the P. D. drift and on the 100-foot level west of the hoisting shaft. In both these localities the ultra-violet lamp indicates the presence of scheelite wherever the contact is exposed, but the mineralized zone is less than two feet wide in most places.
Hartman-Homestake mine. The Hartman-Homestake property comprises 4 patented and about 14 unpatented claims. The mine lies about 6,000 feet by airline due west of the Geesman mine (see fig. 3). It is accessible by a trail about 3 miles long, which starts from the Geesman mine. The trail climbs 900 feet to the top of Oracle Ridge and drops about 300 feet on the other side to the mine workings.
Exploration work consists of four adits, two of which have crosscuts along mineralized fault and fracture zones. The mineralization is localized along a fault and a fracture zone striking about N. 70° E. and dipping steeply southward, along northwest-striking cross fractures, and in favorable garnetized beds, pre- . sumably at the base of the Mississippian (?) marble. These have been mineralized parallel to the bedding for an unknown distance down the dip.
The principal metal disseminated in the garnetized marble beds is copper. The copper content of this rock is about half as great as that of the ore containing also lead, zinc, and silver that occurs in the fracture zones. Assays of that ore, according to a private report by L. C. Crem, show, on the average, 2.8 percent copper, 7.2 percent lead, and 8.8 percent zinc.
Leatherwood property. The Leatherwood property, held by Control Mines, Inc., lies 1J miles by road south of that company's mill.
-9-

rolls shows a moderate amount of copper mineralization. The first roll north of the Daily mine is the most promising and, if practical, would be the logic*! choice to explore first. Loci for prospecting are marked on the surface geologic map. These loci mark the surface orejection of the crests of rolls where ore is most likely to occur (see section A-AO.
P.. The north contact is well mineralised at a point northwest of the Daily mine on the opposite side of the marble mass. The contact is wide at this point, but the mineralization appears to be localized in a north-south fracture zone. The intersection of this fracture zone with the contact should be a likely place for ore. The area which has been marked on the surface map as the locus for prospecting represents the surface projection of the most favorable location for ore (see section B-B 1 ).
Oeesman mine (east of the hoisting shaft) 1. A body of tactite lies between the surface and the top of the stope on the 100-foot level (see section C-C 1 ). Both the back of the stoue on the 100-foot level and the surface show copper mineralisation, ^his area could be explored from the surface or from the 1A level. The possible productive area extends at least 100 feet east of the hoisting shaft (see geologic map).
2. A large unstoped area of possible ore is bounded by the floor of the stope oa the 100-foot level, the back of the stope on the 2A level and the hoisting shaft (see section C-C 1 ). This area could be explored from the 100-foot level, from the hoisting shaft, or frost the 2A level. It can be classed as "inferred ore"- however, prospecting would be desirable.
Geesman mine (west of the hoisting shaft) 1. The contact tactite zone already stoped between the surface and the 200-foot level continues westward. Locally both the P. D. drift and the 100-foot level are mineralized (see map of P. D. drift and 100foot level), but the grade is not known. The mineralised area in the P. D. drift and the 100-foot level should be sampled. If and where the results of the sampling warrant it, the area bounded by the P. D. drift on the north (see map), the 200-foot level on the south \ and the stoped areas on the east should be explored (see sections I-t« and f-
y).
2. Another tactite body lies south of the "marble horse"' on the 200foot level (see map of 200-foot level). This ore is the westward extension of the ore mined from the underhand stope shown on the 200foot level map of the Geesman nine. It could be explored from any along the 200-foot level west of the hoisting shaft (see section D-D»)
3. The floor of the stope on the 250-foot level is in ore. The downward extension should be determined, possibly by drilling.

The accessible workings consist of several adits less than 100 feet in length and two longer adits with cross-cuts. Mear t*e oortal of nost of the adits is P brecciated tactite, which locall**, at its contact with thin basic
dikes, contains oridired ore that ca^ be hand sorted to 12 percent copper. Leasers have been shipping about 2 cars a y*»ar of the hand-sorted ore.

Only traces of copper sulflrte were visible in the accessible adits. one dump, however that* of the cave<! adit rarked ? **> there are several
tons of copper ore composed of chalcopyrite and bornite in a tactite ^ Wo sulfide ore was seen on the other dumos. The known production from Leathenrood ground amounts to above 7 c»r* of oxide ore, shipped during
19Ul, and

On

St rat ton property. The Stratton Copper Company's property, consisting of 12 unpatented claims, adjoins the Leatherwood on the west. It lies about 2,500 feet west of Control road and UOO feet higher, and is accessible only by a trail that brpnches from the road about 2 miles south of the mill of the Control Vines, Inc. The development work consists of a 100-foot inclined adit, two adits less than 50 feet in length, a 50-foot inclined shaft, and several
prospect pits.

The copper mineralization is In a g*raetized rone at the base of a layer of impure limestone lying between ouart sites. In the 100- foot inclined adit, it is restricted to the bottom 5 feet of the tactite and forms a zone not
over 2j feet in average thickness.

The outcrop shows both copper-sulfide and orlde mineralisation for feet at both the north and the south end of the area mapped. Just south of the area a fault striking N. U5°-55° B. shifts the mineralized tactite zone about 500 feet to the northeast, and from this fault the tactite can be traced at least 200 feet northwestward. The tactite on the southeast side of the fault contains a few northeast- striking auartz-molybdenite-chalcopyrite stringers, and little molybdenite is disseminated in the sheared
tactite rock adjacent to the large fault.

Ho ore has been shipped from the property.

Corregidor scheelitc claim. The Corregidor scheelite claim, owned by Newt Wells, president of Control Vines, Inc., is about ^,000 feet east of the Geesman mine (see fig. 3*)- Prospecting to date consists of three trenches and a 30-toot inclined shaft. The scheelite apparently occurs in lenses in puartsite. At least two s-ich lenses have been exposed by trenching, but the prospecting is so incomplete PS to give little idea of grade or continuity of possible tonnpges. Work is still in progress.

Recommendations for prospecting and exploration

Daily mine
1. vorth of the Daily mine along the marble-diorlte contact are surface indications of at least two srall rolls similar to those in the Daily mine which contained ore (see geologic map). The tactite under these.

-10r

About 500 feet west of the hoisting s'^aft for the Geesiran mine is an irregular area, locally showing some oxidized copper minerals that ray be kept in wind for possible future patention. The elongate shaoe of the garnet bodies suggests that trey follow zones of fracturing. The possibilities of the area may be considered to rise or fall as the explorations recommended above succeed or fail.
-12-

