72 ·I
SUMMARY OPERATIONAL REPORT OF A PRELIMINARY GRAVITY SURVEY OF SOUTHEASTERN ALASKA
by DAVID F • BARNES
UNITED STATES GEOLOOICAL SURVEY
Menlo Park, California March 1972
PREPARED WITH SUPPORT OF U.S. ARMY TOPOCOM
Project Order No. 3-68

SUMMARY OPERATIONAL REPORT OF A PRELIMIN\ RY GRAVITY• SURVEY OF SOUTHEASTERN ALASKA
by DAVID F. BARNES
UNITED STATES GEOLOOICAL SURVEY
Menlo Park, California March 1972
PREPARED WITH SUPPORT OF
U.S. ARMY TOPOCCM Project Order Noo 3-68
This report is preliminary.and has not been edited or reviewed · for conformity with Geological
Survey standards

Contents
Introduction Field measurements Brief field work narrative Supporting investigations Sunnnary of quadrangle coverage Preliminary results Acknowledgments Index map References

1 2 4 6 7 8 10 11 12

Summary; Operational Report of a Preliminary Gravity Survey of Southeastern Alaska
•
by David F. Barnes
Introduction In 1968 the U.S. Geological Survey with the support of the U.S.
Army TOPOCU'1 (P~oject Order 3-68) initiated a gravity survey of southeastern Alaska, which was planned as part of the Survey's effort to prepare a gravity _map of the State of Alaska (Barnes, 1969)• The initial effort was to make measurements at intervals of about 1~ miles a~ong the thousands of miles of shoreline which traverse this Alaskan archipelago. A few supporting measurements were ··also made using float planes and helicopters for transportation. During the summers of 1968 and 1969 about 3000 measurements were complet~d along almost all of the waterways east of Chatham Straits. The survey will probably be completed with cooperation of the _State of Alaska d~ring the summer of 1972. This . report briefly swm!arizes the field methods, the logistics and the preliminary results of the 1968 and 1969 field ·work.
Prev~ously published gravity surveys in southeastern Alaska include measurements on the land by Thiel and others (1958), Woollard and others (1960) and by Rice (1969), marine measurements by Dehlinger and others (1966 arid 1970), and calculations by Banks (1969). A few unpub l.ished measurements of gravity have also been made as parts of local mineral and glaciological investigations. The present regional survey was de~igned both to determine the geologic factors influencing the gravity field and to provide a f_ramework for past and future local and marine
1

---------- - - - - - - - -- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --::--
surveys. Other reports in this release describe the establishment of a base station network, the data reduction and show day-by-day tabulations of the measurements. Field measurements
Almost all field travel was by $mall skiffs operating with the support of a larger vessel to provide safety and living quarterso In the first week of 1968 field season and during about three weeks in the 1969 field season, the gravity party. accompanied geologists working off the M/V DON J. MILLER. However, during most of the field work smaller vessels were chartered for the exclusive support of the gravity -survey. The latter system enabled the project chief to plan the field work so that shorelines of l~rge water bodies were mapped in calm weather, and the smaller, more-sheltered bays could be mapped in bad weather. Thus the use of smaller support 'les~rels was rrore efficient> B!ld inspite of Alaskan weather, some field work was performed on almost every day away from port. The most efficient coverage was also obtained by two skiffs operating from a one support vessel.
LaCoste geodetic gravimeters were us~d for almost all of the measurements except that Worden meter 226 replaced one of the meters during the first three weeks of the 1968 season and first two weeks of the 1969 season while the availability of a second LaCoste meter was delayed. Meter temperature was maintained with the standard 4-ampere-hour nickelcadmium batteries, which were charged each night from _the support vessels' power 9upply. Electrical problems on some of the support vessels caused a .few charging failures and later losses of meter-temperature, but none
2

of these late-in-the-day battery failures significantly delayed the field work nor influenced data quality • . Drift control was maintained through a large network of base and control stations established at overnight anchorages and traverse-intersection points, and this network is described in a separate report. Meter drift was apparently accelerated by the vibrations encountered by the light skiffs travelling in choppy waters, and many loop and traverse closures ranged from ±.05 to ±0~15 mgals. This complicated the adjustment o~ the base network, but most of th~ tabulated observed gravities should have precisions of ±0.10 mgals or better. The few traverses that include uncertainties greater than 0.2 mgal have been identified in the tabulated data.
Sea level corrected for tidal variations was used for almost all of the elevation control, so the elevation datum for the survey is mean-tide level. Almost 200 tidal bench marks were· also occupied during the survey, and their elevations were measured and calculated by the same hand-leveling and tidal-correction techniques used for the other gravity stations. A comparison between our calculated elevations at these bench marks and those obtained from the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey's tidal records, suggests that 60 percent of the gravity.:..station elevations are within a foot of their precise elevation and that less than 2 percent might contain errors of more than a meter.
In other parts of Alaska the elevation uncertainty is much larger because of frequent use of altimetry, so terrain corrections have not . been m~de on most USGS Alaska n gravity data. However, both the quality of the elevation control in Southeastern Alaska and the abundance of
3

steep topography suggest that terrain corrections are desirable for these data. However, such corrections will .require a great deal of effort and they will not be funded until the field ~urvey is completed and until a preliminary interpretation. has been made of the data. Brief field work narrative
The field work began on May 26, 1968 when J. Do Luetscher initiated measurements along the west shore of the Portland Canal working with some geologists off the USGS M/V DON J. MILLER. The project chief joined . the ship on May 30 at .Hyder, and a 4-man party continued the survey back down the Portland Canal, into Boca- de-Quadra and then through t~e Behm Canal until June 6. The M/V TAKU was then chartered at Ketchikan and the party proceedea northward to Petersburg and Wrangell, where the support vessel developed mechanical and electrical problems. After these were repaired the group worked southward amongst the big bays on the east side of Prince of Wales Island and then northward on the Pacific coast of Dall Island, where bad weather caused some delays. This survey from the M/V TAKU reached as far north as Craig and then returned southward through Cordova Bay, which was. completely surveyed before the vessel's charter ended on July 13, 1968.
During the summer of 1968, a ·long helicopter traverse was also completed between Cordova and Petersburg, which obtained data on the Yakutat coastline and in parts of the Coast Range mountains. However, the primary purpose o{ this trip wa~ to ferry a helicopter from one geological party in the Wrangell Mountains to another geological party on Kos c:I.usko Island, and the amount of time and data collection were
4

limited. Late in August the project chief and R. C. Olson returned to Ketchikan for small-boat traverses on waters near the city and for
float-plane traverses to establish base-c•ontrol for the earlier surveys
and to obtain new stations on interior lakes. The final 1968 traverse was made along the highway between Haines and the Canadian border.
On June 11, 1969 the survey resumed at Craig, where Barnes and Peter Popenoe joined a geological party working off the M/V DON J. MILLER amongst the islands northwest of the limit of the 19~8 survey. When the geologists headed southward the gravity party left the MILLER and moved to Wrangell to complete traverses left undone, when . the M/V TAKU had devel?ped mechanical troubles during the.previous summer. On June 24 the M/V BLUE STAR was chartered at Petersburg and it supported traverses in Sumner and Keku Straits and left Popenoe and Mike Klupfel to continue the survey from a shore base at K.ake. This two-man party later rejoined·the M/V DON J. MILLER at Petersburg and accompanied its geological party for traverse on the southwest shore of Stevens Passage. When this work ended, they moved to Yakutat _for skiff and road traverses near Yakutat and Dry Bays. Popenoe left the party in early August, and further work that month was slowed· by mechanical and weather problems. Two traverses were made near Haines, some road traverses.were made at Juneau, .and R. C. Olson completed a traverse along the Alaskan portion of the ·White Pass and yukon Railway.
The remainder of the survey was completed by a five-man party working with two skiffs off the USGS M/V l\TATERS on two trips from Juneau. The first trip began on August 26 and completed the survey of Lynn Canal and
5

its tributaries between Juneau and Skagway. The second trip completed traverses on Ste·vens passage between Juneau and Petersburg and the vessel then headed southwest. Traverses around Kosciusko Island filled the gap left between the pri·or surveys frrnr the M/V DON J. MILLER and M/V BLUE STAR. The WATERS returned to Juneau via Chatham Straits, but heavy rain and"strong winds limited the data collection to Port Malmesbury and the bays near Killisnoo., Other bays were left unsurveyed to provide sheltered work .for periods of bad weather while the traverses along Chatham Strait are completed in 1972o The 1969 data collection ended on September 12. Supporting investigations
Although the collection of gravity data was ··the initial objective of the Southeastern Alaskan gravity survey, the ultimat objective is a geological interpretation of 'the region's gravity field. To aid this · interpretation, hand specimens for laboratory density m~asurements were collected of the rock outcrops at ab®ut two-thirds of the gravity stations. These lab~ratory measurements have now been completed on about two-thirds of the specimens, but much additional work must be done before all the specimens are identified and associated with specific geologic units. However, these density data will eventually.'provide a useful aid for the interpretation of the gravity data.
Secondly, the possibility of using altimetry control for additional gravity stations . inland from the waterways was also considered. On a good many days one skiffcarried a set of surveying altimeters and measurements '\vere made at a:ll stations. .These altimeter measurements
6

could be processed with very little additional effort on the same computer

program that reduced the gravity data. The simplest possible base control of linear interpolation between1morning and evening measurements was used

and the ;:results can be compared 'tvith the sea-level elevations to estimate
I
the range and the frequency of local atmosphere pressure variations. These

altimeter measurements were made in all weather types except high winds I I
and heavy rain. Preliminary in~pection of the results suggests that in

SoutheasterJ?. Alaska very few lopal ot: tem~oral atmospheric pressure

variations would cause altimet~y errors greater than 3 meters.

Summary of quadrangle coverage /

Figure 1 shows the completed traverses and serves .as an index for
the 14 1:250,000 quadrangle ~apb on which the gravity station numbers I
and simple•Bouguer anomalies are .plotted. No .:stations were obtained in
I
the Mt. Fairweather quadrangle, ~ and future surveys are planned for it,

the Juneau, Sitka and Port Alexander quadrangles. Table 1 lists fourteen

g~avityquadrangles and the number of

stations now available in each

quadrangle.

Table 1

Southeastern Alaskan G~avity Coverage by Quadrangle

Quadrangle Prince ·Rupert Dixon Entrance Ketchikan Craig Bradfield Canal Petersburg Port Alexander

I.
Number of Stations
126 187 516 .
692.
49 588
80

Quadrangle Sumdum Sitka Taku River Juneau At lin Skagway Yakutat

Number of Stations
285 "145
54 233
4 134 172

I.

7

The total number of stations is 3265. Many of the quadrangles ,1 cover large por~S,ions of Canada and the Pacific Ocean, so the relative
number of stations is not a good indicatfon of density of coverage. Pre lirriinary . results
' The broad gravity coverage in the southern part of Southeastern Alaska permits easy contouring which reveals the important features of the gravity field. In the northern part of the archipelago, the data are still limited to a narrow belt, where contouring is more difficult, but where the same regional features as in the south may be recognized.
Even the contouring based on the early data of Thiel and others (1958) revealed · that the gravity field decreased from positive simple Bouguer anomalies J?,ear the western coastline to negative anomalies below -100 mgals near the Canadian border. The new data s.how that this decrease does not occnr in a continuous zr;vlient~ but in t't·!O gradients_ sepa~ated by a fairly flat gravity field of positive values (mostly 0 to +40 mgals)' over the western islands of the archipelago. Furthermore, on the bounilary betweertthis flat field and the negative gradient on its eastern side, is anarrow regional high, which is marked by sharp local highs associated with known mafic intrusions. The two largest positive anomalies are at opposite ends of the archipelago and occur over the Haines gabbro body in the north and the Duke Island mafic complex in the south. Smaller gravity highs along the intervening trend are associated with m6re local mafic outcrops.
Recent geologic interpretations (Jones, 1971) suggest that the Paleozoic rocks, which outcrop in the western :islands, may be a fragment of older continental rocks displaced from much more southern latitudes
8

along one of the transform faults bounding the Pacific Ocean. The relatively· high gravity which occurs over these rocks suggests a thin crust, so the section might be considered a thin raft which could logically be moved a long with an adjoining '·' oceanic p1ate.
Much of the rich mineralization of southeastern Alaska occurs along ·· the flanks of the belt of high gravity, and a more detailed study of the relationship between the gravity field and the mapped geology may have future economic significance. Several of the local gravity lows are associated with granitic intrusives, so the dimensions of these may be calculated after the densities of the intrusives and surrounding rocks have been determined. Comparison of the new land data and the marine data obtained by Dehlinger and others (1966 and 1970) will reveal the offshore extent of the anomalies and provide information about the thickn.Gss of sediments bcnc.::.th the inland ~.::.r-i;:1.e passc.gcs. For ~~{a~pl2,
1~· •
the marine da.ta show negative anomalies below -30 mgals in Clarence Strait
and Dixon Entrance, where the shorel"ine anomalies average close to +20
mgalso The resulting SO~gal. negative anomaly suggests a sedimentary basin thick enough to have petroleum potential.
The negative gradient on the east side of the central belt of high gravities probably represents a thickening crust with a smaller contribution from low-density granitic intrusives. This gradient causes a fairly continuous gravity decrease of about -100 mgals in a distance of about 75 miles or 1.3 mgals per mile, which suggests that it is caused by deep changes at the base of the crust. Furthermore, isostatic corrections ~ calculated by Banks (1969) eliminate most of the negative·anomaly and
9

.
---------~.-.--------,---~----~-~ - - - -·- - - -
fure!er suggest that the gradient is caused by crustal thickness changes. Locally the Simple-Bouguer anomaly may be as steep as 5 mgals per mile, but many of these gradient changes correlate better with changes of estimated terrain effects than with mapped changes of geologic outcrops. Thus terrain corrections may be necessary before the gravity data can provide maximum geologic usefulness. The -gravity traverses almost reached or crossed the eastern·Canadian border on the White Pass and Yukon Railway, the Taku River, the Whiting River, the Stikine River, and the Portland Canalo In all of these traverses except the Stikine River, the lowest gravity anqmalies were measured '\vest of the int.ernational boundary, and the anomalies then rise towards less negative vel~es ~est of th~ bo~dero Acknowledgments
Many organizations .and individuals contributed to the success of the Southeastern Alaskan gravity su~vey, which received its primary financial support from the U.S o Army TOPOCCM. The. 1968 field parties
included R. C. Olson, J. D. Luetscher, D~ Lo feterson, Ko Do Crowther
and William Toddo The 1969 field parties included Peter Popenoe, Mike Klupfel, Ro Co Olson, M. V. MacKenzie, Bo J. Klud, and Ao W. Savage. Captains of the four support vessels were Ro D. Stacey, Nels Larsen, Roland Burrows and L. J. · Whistler. Mo Vo MacKenzie Wrote most of the computer prog!-ams used in the data reduction, and other
data reduction problems were assisted by Ro c. Olson, R. L. Morin,
K. Do Holden, M. V. MacKenzie, and Mo J. Erwin •
.;
10

U.S.. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY GRAVITY COVERAGE
SOUTHEAST, ALASKA
AND MAP INDEX

50
IH

SCALE IN MILES

0 H

50

100

GRAVITY TRAYERSE

l

0
• ~ - ,. < ...
) / X O//

r. r:
~ ' L.a..r-_..., . 1 .,. \L
I

Clements

Referenc·es

Banks, E. R., 1969, Bouguer and isostatic gravity anomalies along the
•
Inside Passage of British Columbia ·and Alaska (abstract): Trans.

Amer. Geophys. Un., EOS, v. 50, no. 11, p. 633, ' (also unpublished

Master of Science thesis, Oregon State Univ., Corvallis, Oregon 1969)
·· P"""" .;.··
Barnes, D. F., 1969, Progress on a gravity map of Alaska: Trans. Amer.

Geophys. Uno, EOS, v_. 50, no. 10, p. 550-552 o

Dehlinger, Peter, Gemp~rle, Michael, Couch, Ro W., and Hood, D. W.,

1966, Free-air gravity anomalies along the inside passage _of

British Columbia and Alaska; Jour. Geophys. Res., v. 71, p. 6011-6015.

Dehlinger, Peter, Couch, R. W., McManus, D. A., ··and Gemperle, M~chael,

1970, Northeast Pacific Structure: in Maxwell, A. E., The Sea:

v. 4, pt. 2, Po 133-189·, Wiley Interscience, New York • •
Jones, D. L., Irwin, N. P., and OVenshine, A. T., 1972~, Southeastern

I • Alaska--a displaced continenta~ fragment? in Geological Survey

Research, 1972: U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper BOOB, Po B213-B219.

Rice, D. A., 1969, Gravity observations in Alaska, 1964-1965, including

some repeat observations: in Leopold, L. E. and Wood, F. J., The

Prince William Sound, Alaska Earthquake and its Aftershocks: U.S.

Coast and Geodetic Survey Pub. 10-3, part A, p. 5-20.

Thiel, Edw.ard, W. E. Bonini, N. A. Ostenso, and G. Po Woollard, 1958,

Gravity measurements in Alaska: Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

Ref. 58-54, 105 pp.

Woollard, G. P., Ostenso, No A., Thiel, Edward, and W. E. Bonini, 1960,

Gravity anomalies, crustal structure; and geology in Alaska: Jour •

.
Geophys. Reso, v. 65, no. 3, po 1021-1037.

.~

l
12

