DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
Guides to exploration for coal deposits in Permo-Carboniferous rocks in Sab Paulo State, Brazil by I/ Ro:meo M. Flores
Open-File Report 84-264
Report prepared for Institute de Pesquisas Tecnologicas, State of Seio Paulo, Brazil
This report is preliminary and has not been reviewed for conformity with U.S. Geological Survey editorial standards and stratigraphic nomenclature I/ U.S. Geological Survey, Denver, CO 80225
1984

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION.................................................... DEPOSITIONAL MODELING METHODS FOR COAL EXPLORATION.............. STRATIGRAPHIC SYNTHESIS......................................... SEDIMENTOLOGIC SYNTHESIS........................................ FACIES SYNTHESIS................................................ FACIES AND PALEOGEOGRAPHIC MAPPING.............................. IMPLEMENTATION OF DEPOSITIONAL MODELING OF THE ITARARE
FORMATION AND ASSOCIATED ROCK UNITS.......................... COAL GEOCHEMISTRY AND QUALITY................................... APPENDIX I - GUIDELINES ON COLLECTING COAL SAMPLES FOR
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS............................................ REFERENCES CITED................................................
ILLUSTRATIONS
Figure 1. Generalized geologic map and location of study area in the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil..............
2. Composite stratigraphic section of the Precambrian and Paleozoic rocks in the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil...................................
3. Lithologic log and inferred paleoenvironments for the Wasatch Formation, Wyoming..................
4. Detailed lithologic log and interpretation of a measured section..................................
5. Environmental-stratigraphic cross section of the lower part of the Allegheny Formation in Ohio.............................................
6. Cross-stratification types related to a range of flow conditions, grain size, and aggradation rate....................................
7. Diagrammatic reconstruction of coal-forming swamps and facies relationships in a delta-plain environment in Pennsylvanian rocks of West Virginia..............................
8. Facies map of the lower part of the Allegheny Formation in western Pennsylvania...................
9. Isopach and facies maps of Cenozoic fluvial deposits in the Texas Gulf Coast....................

Page 1 4 5 10
13 17 22 29 32 34
2
3
6
7
9
12
16
18
19

CONTENTS
Figure 10. A sand percentage map of Eocene fluvial deposits in Texas Gulf Coast.................................
11. A ratio map of the interval from the Upper Greenhorn Formation to the Lower Cretaceous Lakota Formation in North Dakota....................
12. Coal-forming swamps in fluvio-deltaic environments of the Allegheny Formation in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia...............
13. Facies associations and relationships of the Allegheny Formation in Ohio, Kentucky, and West Virginia.......................................
14. An Isopach map of total thickness of coal beds and adjoining distributary channel sandstones in the Vermejo Formation, Raton basin, Colorado............................................
15. A map showing relationship of sulfur content of the lower Kittaning coal and environments of overlying beds in western Pennsylvania..............
Table 1. Sedimentological criteria for recognition of environments of deposition..........................
2. Classification of environments of deposition..........

Page 20 21 23 26
28 31 11 14

ii

Guides to exploration for coal deposits in Permo-Carboniferous rocks in Sao Paulo State, Brazil by Romeo M. Flores U.S. Geological Survey INTRODUCTION
A 2-week visit (July 3-18, 1982) was made to Sao Paulo, Brazil, to advise the Carvao Group of Pr<5 Minerio, Institute de Pesquisas Tecnologicas (IPT) on exploration for economic deposits of coal in Permo-Carboniferous rocks in the State of Sao Paulo (fig. 1). The objective was to use depositional modeling methods as a guide for coal exploration. Lithologic variations, internal structures, trace fossils, and facies sequences and associations of strata were observed along road cuts and drainages in the vicinities of Piracicaba, Cirquilho, Tiete, Tatui, Capao Bonito, Taquarituba, Itaporanga, Buri, Itapeva, and Itapetininga (fig. 1). Data for the modeling study of the coal-bearing Itarare Formation and lower parts of the Tatui and Rio Bonito Formations (fig. 2) were collected during an 8-day field trip and during office discussions with five Pr6 Mindrio geologists headed by Mr. Siuzi Nakano (Chief Geologist, Carvao Group). A separate field trip was made to study a thick accumulation of peat along the floodplain of Rio Paraiba near Taubate (fig. 1). Fulldiameter cores from drill holes in the vicinity of Buri were also examined. A summary of the field trip and the discussions was presented to Dr. Erasto Boretti de Almeida, Vice President, Pr6 Minerio, on the last day of the visit. This report is an expansion of the administrative report submitted to Dr. Almeida and Mr. Nakano.

4T»W
co*t

CONVEN(5O*ES
Cop«om«nto pal«oz6lco m«*oz6lco
Cap»am«nto c«noz6leo Rochot crlttaloflliana*- da >! d« Sflo Roqu* Inoluindo locolmvnt*. gnaittct granite* * 4 » j Rochat gronitlzodat, grant to* t gnalstt* localm«nt« roohas ±_sj criitaloflllanat prlnclpalmvnt* do ondar superior do arqutano
I I FIELD TRIP AREA

*. w »

10 40 M M 100km

lOwvarii M MariM

Figure 1.

Flg.OS-O PRE-DEVONIANO OE SAO PAULO (S«gundo MORAES REOO, L. F. DC 1953 mod If Icodo )
Generalized geologic map and location of study area in the State
of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Modified from IPT, 1981.

IDADE ^
gint?o
(JIM

s

<
O

oK

M

O co

UJ
IE

J

R

I

s

P

< o
b
M
O UJ
-I <C
CL

M
I S
I

COLUNA ESTRATIGRAFICA DA BACIA DO PARANA'

/ Espea FOR MAQAO LITOLOGI/ mox. mm.

AMBIENTE DESCRICAO -
DEPOdSICAO

Adit »oLAO*t.DC- .v:j."::.*;:~:

KJSiTfll SW*t»'lClAll
»o iMTc«io« c Dc*tf <

»* » »

ITOt LITOB&MID*

TT .""*»^1. . -

150

c«iTot reuce co««oi.io«.»««

COM LI«TCI DC

ILAt (

MIVII8 COkC^OMf r-fiCO .M

*»C

CO«TI»C«IAL: PLA«(CIC
ALWVIAL C LACUtTKCSi
coiuviAc*

BAURU

^ x-aj; fVITOt CO* ««1»IX « ! 200 LOX* eu c*Mt«to ckiciVcite

if»'j*"^yjt-

SIlTlTOt BaCCHA S«ML

COMTIMEMTAL : FLAM/CIC
AkVWIAL C LACVSTflCSi

t?~ V ¥ V

VV V %

-z.01
LJ

SERRA GERAL

V V VV

V VVV V V VV

1550

C^> v v

CD v v vv

^~L_X *-J Z_^ V<j^^y

*Ot BOTUCATU

bOO

in PIRAMBOIA : :'. :.: ^^ 700

i^^*^

CO RIO DO RASTO

6OO

»f*MAMCS DC ASM.TOS COM IC«-

Tf» »C

OITD »A D*sr

*«CMITO; tCM SCLCCtOMADOS COM ««IOX,SCM COOMOAOOS
I SCM cs'CMices rouc< *«CILA
AMMIIPS CO" CMlOl »COO«O*OOS
K IS'twicoa oivcaao* MIVCU OCLAMITOS
SILTITOS CONTCMOO . DCS LXIOIX DC AKCMITOS FIMOS

VULCAHISKO
COMTIMCMTAL: coVico
CONTIMfMTAL: fXMVIAL t LACUSIKf
COWTWCHTAL: PLAMI'CIC
A4.UVIAU

O -.-. .-: ::-.-.v.v.

O

<
CO

ESTRADA NOVA

r. ! ''j * .V *~~ "*" **^-"***- TOO

CO
< -x z i GL IRAT!

r. . ......
z_ J==^_ i-

^ =s^z -

^ "^ ^LI

195

PALERMO -.

3OO~-~ *~" -~ "~

ttrrros. AWMtros FIMOS wivci« ec
CALCXNtOS OOklTlCO* C COOUIMAS
roLMCLMO* r««o*CTuwi*o»a« CA*.-
Cl>'«lOS COLDMITOS SICTITDS
SILTlTO* C SILTITDS AMCMOSOS.

ISTOv PLAMl'dC DC HA*(. DCLTAICO
MISTO-. LA*U>A HISTO: FLA»idC K MAHC

^SFATUI

O 30 BONITC

400
S*5vy%

AHCMITOS C BtLTITO* CPM I*TT»CAIACSCS DC CAMAOAS «C CMWIO

d

<
CD
^>
\- TARAR£

^>^7^?ssy r^y^Xw-v-r:.:r._:i-r?" y rt'-^-'*^_" v AftCMITOt. SILTITOS/VAWITDa C B^>
1300 TOMICTITOS( ALCUMS VEKDADCt-
OS TIUITOS)

*/

s :-.--.- j-.v;-.v.-

r

.- ^ -

COMTlMCHTALr FLUVIAL MIS TO: DELTA ICO

CONTINENTAL .
, M ." > rd

CLACSAL .' FLUVIAL LACUSTNC

I*TO

AHIMMO: MCiirTiCD

IATO

--

POTENOAUDADE
-
ZSHVAT9MO eSC*VATD*«IO
CtC»VATO*«O «t»A&0»A C
t«C»vATtf«lO CHADOKA CSCI>VATO«IO
t£JJLCO«A ^C CSCHVATORIO
.'

!
st

\^ « "^1"^ ^>

0 M PARAN/ ^GROSSA

650 SICTITOS C FOXMCLMO*

AMI UNO

~^ ~

^^^^S=^>^^^I FURNAS

AHImTOS rCLOS^ATICOS COM Cl-
45O TMATiriCACAD CXU2AOA Ut«TU

COMTWCMTAL: FLUVIAL
MISTD

"N^>-^s^vy^sxN»/ Vs^v^9^

DC A««ILA MA DASC

AHIMMO

SSSSS-ft*

HAMITOS . "ATITOS. AtSSCX

0

yssH*^&-s»J-'¥*-f

kisret. vA*riir»«.

C*ADC«A

1

CSC*VATd>t»

-

fifur* 2.

Composite stratigraphic section of the Precasbriaa and Paleozoic rocks in the Stare of- Sao Paulo, Srasil. Study interval is the Itarare Foraation. Adopted froo IPX, 1981.

This report was prepared for IPT, Sao Paulo, Brazil. The author is grateful to the following officials and geologists of IPT for their expert assistance, stimulating discussions, and gracious hospitality: Dr. Erasto Boretti de Almeida (Vice President, Pro Minerio), Mr. Siuzi Nakano (Chief Geologist, Carvao Group), Mr. Marsis Cabral, Jr. (Geologist, Carvao Group), Mr. Carlos Alberto Ciantelli, Jr. (Geologist, Carvao Group), Mr. Jose Francisco M. Motta (Geologist, Carvao Group), and Ms. M. Rita Caetano Chang (Consulting Geologist, Rio de Janeiro). The kind and essential assistance of support personnel of IPT is also gratefully acknowledged.
DEPOSITIONAL MODELING METHODS FOR COAL EXPLORATION Depositional modeling as a method of identifying areas likely to contain minable coal resources must be approached logically and systematically. The first phase of exploration should consist of the following: 1. Identification of potential coal resource areas by search of the literature, examination of outcrops, and exploratory drilling. 2. Geologic reconnaissance mapping (1:250,000 scale) to establish areal extent, distribution of rock types, and structural features of coal basins or coal fields. 3. Detailed geologic mapping (1:25-50,000 scale) of known coal basins or coal fields that contain near-surface deposits of coal. 4. Establishment of a general lithologic sequence of the coal-bearing strata. 5. Reconnaissance exploratory drilling. The second phase of exploration should consist of a step-by-step synthesis of stratigraphic and sedimentologic information as follows: 1. Synthesis of stratigraphic (local and regional framework) data. 2. Synthesis of sedimentologic (physical and biological properties)
data.

3. Synthesis of facies (sequences, associations, and relationships) data.
4. Facies mapping and paleogeographic reconstruction. The tasks of the first phase of the exploration were partly completed by the initial geological work of Pr6 Minerio prior to my visit. Included were stratigraphic and sedimentologic investigations of the coal-bearing rocks. A remaining task to be accomplished in the first phase of exploration is detailed mapping (1:25-50,000 scale) of the coal beds known from outcrops and drilling. A topographic base map with a contour interval of 2 to 5 m should be used to show elevations, the thickness and areal extents of coal beds, and local structures in the Buri and Cirquilho coal fields. It will also facilitate projection of coal beds into unknown areas. These data can be then used for estimating coal resources. A guideline to this type of mapping is included in the Appendix. Because the data base has been compiled, only the detailed mapping remains to be done before the second phase of exploration could be implemented.
STRATIGRAPHIC SYNTHESIS Stratigraphic data can be collected in several ways: 1) measurement of outcrop sections; 2) description of cores from exploratory drill holes; and 3) lithologic interpretation of geophysical logs from exploratory drill holes. These stratigraphic data should be compiled and recorded as graphic logs. Data from continuous cores should be plotted in graphic lithologic logs following the example in figure 3. Stratigraphic data from outcrops and data interpreted from geophysical logs should be plotted in graphic logs following the example in figure 4. These graphic logs are the principal method of constructing environmental-stratigraphic cross sections.

1U5l **

JFOOTNOTES
BI ,

* MMHMM

MBMMMl ft

I-

«MMi^BHai
MMM«H«H* «
^

A

~(

-

*_

m>_
e

>~
mmtmmm ivTT^k

M

HE -« -
»

*

^
"^^
«MMH^HM «M«»«HIM * I

:

\:
* »V

SEDINENTART DOMINANT GRAIN

ACESORIESBIAOLNOGDIC* CONSTITUENTS

BEDDING THICKNESS

SIZE

w SORTING

JJ

STR.
TAV\

.

Xj 4

!*/''!\i

H fv CaCOj

nods,

000 <

:'//!;«.;..':. I**.I*
/I. i;.i l.j. i. -

Pyrlte Plant debris
-

«*./<>«
Sf\
f?s
A-
X
X
-<X

F, j ' \ i
wtif-rjf-rV.lj\r«»J».. v< .!.1|:.«,jp,,j..«j..
r1i 1 L
a.:.iJ.j.;l , , rp " ".' ; r1 lTiTiiT .U.i.l:.:.;.

lint tobrls, baCOj '
:ico3 1 nods.
Plant remain pyr.H« stderl

. , ii
.1 ..t.j.4. t. ( . r ,

- ... ...

l! !

CaCO,

x x r j ! * * *H-BM . 3..I.! .'.*..» A
yL

1 FeO nods.

M-Din ..j..jj-.v...!<.;:.i|:,,r.;;.

> x=

"y\\ !" l

CaC03

\! l! !

nods.

"x $
1 «Onrn

'V1 » ^' i '* j
..A/,. r ;..i-.:

\ DESCRIPTION

Grey sllty clays grading up Into very Pine sand; parallel bedded up Into

jrtpple bedded; scour and fill; load casts; distorted beds; lenticular -laminations. Includes pyrlte, orgs., CaCDj roots In upper part.
dark grey, highly organic clay with -common silt lenses; bloturbated,

especially In tower part; parallel to lenticular bedded; synerlsls cracks.

Includes pyrlte, nodules.

CaOj

J.1ghter» clean clays with scattered silt lenses; parallel , CaC03 ceawnted laminae; rooted. Includes CaC03 nodules, tubules, geodes. Iron oxides abundant* esp. rlmilng roots; Minor
pyrlte,
D*aVk, very organic clays with thin Woody peat beds; abundant rooting, -organic partings; Minor flood silts.
^Includes plant remains, pyrlte, FeS, slderlte; Minor CaCOj.

... t'fg"h'{"i"a'n"lo"grey"sUVy"eYay" wltV""""

lighter silt Interbeds; Intense J>urrow)ng, remanent lamination and silt banding, abundant plant remains,
oxydlzed, abundant rooting, scattered "nodules, mottled.

Light tan to grey sllty clay with silt 'laminae; thin parallel to wavey laminations, occasional scouring, -burrowing common, roots; definite
.zone of nodules.

Figure 3. Llthologic log ahd inferred paleoenvironnents for the Wasatch

Formation Wyonins, United States. Adopted fron Deutsch and

others, 1979.

ENVIRONMENT DOEPOSIFTION INFERRED

acnredva/sor Lacustrine fdieltla
splay

Lacustrine '.

0.

Veil-drained
SIMMp

t* * X? tt
NLaotuwraelr Levee

1I »OCKJ,, j
TV PC I I

GRAIN $li£ > STRUCTURES
M I S.. j S* j

CuPflEVT JUKI DIRECTION |

rs
sw-

w»t» SpUys
Setay Bar
POMt
i sw-t
CJtai
Flfurc 4. Detailed litholoric log and interpretation of z =*as=re£ action. Parts of the core which were not recovered vere no:
.described. Adopted froo' Ethridge and others, 1S8C7

The cross-sectional panels should be constructed by using a best-fit method, which takes into consideration differential compaction and lithofacies relationships. The correlation between measured sections and core holes is made by tracing several key beds such as coal, sandstone, and limestone along the outcrop from one section to the adjacent section or by comparison of logs of core holes. If key beds are not present, a generalized facies correlation may be attempted on the basis of rock types that are deemed to be in the same stratigraphic interval (for example, lower, middle, upper parts of formations). A deltaic facies may be correlated with a fluvial facies in its landward direction and to a prodelta-offshore marine facies in its seaward direction. In more specific cases, a working facies model such as a fluvial channel sandstone may be correlated with floodplain-backswamp deposits; or in a deltaic interval, a distributary channel sandstone may be correlated with interdistributary bayfill-swamp deposits. Figure 5 is an example of the best-fit method of correlation.
Constructions of cross sections should be presented in networks of panels (e.g., west to east, north to south, northeast to southwest directions). These cross-section panels can show facies changes and 3-dimensional vertical and lateral variations of the rock types. In addition, the cross-section panels can be used to determine geographic changes in lithology with time and to prepare facies maps and paleogeographic reconstructions. Cross sections should be constructed for each local area of interest as well as for the entire region. Regional cross sections (e.g., from Itaporanga to Buri) can be established from composite stratigraphic sections. These regional cross sections are useful in determining the facies changes which must be recognized if basin facies analysis is to be successful.

"YANPORT" LIMESTONE

"CLARION" AND "SCRUBGRASS" COALS

ZALESKI FLINT

-PUTNAMHIIL id LIMESTONE

EXPLANATION
HACK CHERT AND SILICEOUS SILTSTONE WITH MARINE OR IRACKISH FAUNA LIMESTONE WITH MARINE OR IRACKISH FAUNA SHALE OR SILTSTONE WITH MARINE OR IRACKISH FAUNA SHALE OR SILTSTONE WITHOUT FAUNA SANDSTONE COAL SEAT ROCK
CONTROL SECTION

Figure 5.

Environmental-stratigraphic cross section of the lower part of Allegheny Foroation in Ohio, United States. Adopted from Cavaroc and Fern, 1968.

SEDIMENTOLOGIC SYNTHESIS Collection of sedimentologic data (table 1) on the physical and biological properties of sedimentary rocks should be integrated with the stratigraphic data. The physical properties that provide important clues to rock genesis include mineral composition, grain size, sorting, and internal structures. These petrographic features are genetically diagnostic in sandstones and can be determined from field observations and petrographic study of thin sections. The petrography of the sandstone indicates the nature of the source area of the sediments as well as .the conditions of their transport. Field investigation of grain-size distribution (that is, coarsening-upward or fining-upward sequence) through a vertical section may also yield important information relative to environments of deposition. Study of internal structures consists of identification of the types of cross stratification (for example, festoon crossbeds, planar crossbeds, ripple laminae, or convolute laminae) of rocks as well as the nature of vertical arrangement of cross-stratification types (for example, festoon crossbeds grading upward into ripple lamination or vice versa, fig, 6). Internal structures of rocks including surface markings and imprints, scour marks, tool marks, and syndepositional structures are useful indicators of sedimentary processes. Syndepositional structures formed during deposition such as diapirs, mudlumps, slumps, microfaults, contorted bedding, and ball-and-pillow structures are indicative of slope processes (delta front, prodelta). Paleocurrent patterns (fig. 4) derived from cross stratifications can also be very useful in facies interpretation. Measurement of the dip of crossbeds and pebble imbrication indicate current flow and directions.
10

Table 1. Sedimentological criteria for recognition of environments of deposition

Petrographic

Internal structures

Syndepositional structures

Biologic

Mineralogy Grain size Sorting

Festoon crossbeds Planar crossbeds Ripple laminae Convolute laminae

Diapirs

Fossil shells

Mudlumps

Fossil casts

Slumps

Fossil molds

Microfaults

Trace fossils

Contorted bedding horizontal and

Ball-and-pillow

vertical burrows

structure

11

Flow
, ; . .-f -r .:-:.M.'>ii ,- /.' . /..
INCIPIENT RIPPLES Fully Divtloptd
CURRENT RIPPLES ON SAND.
K>

Ftow COMBINED-FLOW RIPPLES

Low»f Vftocity

Higher Velocity

CURRENT RIPPLES ON SILT

High Aggrtdttion

Fifurt 6.

Cross-stratification types related to a range of flow conditions, grain size, and aggradation rate. Adopted from Harms and others, 1975.

Marine fossil remains are an important key to environments of deposition. In the absence of body fossils, trace fossils, such as burrows of bottom-dwelling animals, provide the next best biological evidence of the environment of associated sediments. The patterns of burrows, that is, whether they are horizontal or vertical, may serve to indicate the nature of water energy in the environment; bottom animal grazers that produce horizontal burrows commonly live in quiet, deep water. In contrast, animals that ingest sediments of the substrate in high-energy, shallow-water environments build vertical-escape structures.
The petrology, texture, internal structure, and biological characteristics are combined to serve as a tool in interpreting specific environments of deposition of a rock type or sequences of rock types (fig. 3). A rock type, such as a sandstone, deposited in a specific environment may be identified as channel, crevasse splay, or distributary mouth bar facies. A burrowed shale grading upward into rippled and burrowed siltstone may be identified as a bayfill facies.
FACIES SYNTHESIS A facies is a body of rock having physical and biological properties that are characteristic of a specific environment of deposition (for example, channel, crevasse splay). A body of rock or suite of rocks thought to have formed in one environment (table 2) can be grouped as a facies (fluvial facies, deltaic facies, shallow marine facies). These different definitions and uses of facies are justified as long as one is aware of how the term is used. A facies can be characterized on the basis of its sequences, associations, and relationships.
13

Table 2.--Classlfication of environments of deposition (modified froa LeBlanc. 1972).

Alluvial (Fluvial) Continental
Eolian
Deltaic

Transitional

Coastal Inter-
Deltaic

Marlne

Shallow Marine
Deep Marine

HIERARCHY OF ENVIRONMENTS

Alluvial
Fans (Apex. Middle
& Base of Fan)

Scream Flows
Viscous Flows

Braided Screams

Meandering Streams (Alluvial Valley)
Dunes

Meander Belts
Floodbaslns
Costal Dunes Desert Dunes
Other Dunes

Upper Deltaic
Plain
Lower Deltaic
Plain

Meander Belts
Floodbasins
Distributary Channels
Interdistributary
Areas

Fringe
Distal
Coastal Plain
(Subaerial)
Subaqueous
Shelf (Nerltlc)
Canyons Fans (Deltas)
Slope & Abyssal Trenches & Troughs

Inner Delta Front
Outer Delta Front
Barrier Islands
Chenier Plains
Tidal
Lagoons
Tidal Channels
Small Estuaries
Inner Middle Outer
14

Channels Sheetfloods Sieve Deposits
Debris Flows Mudflows Channels
(Varying Sizes) Longitudinal Bar
Transverse Bar Channels
Natural Levees
Point Bars Streams, Lakes & Swamps Types : Transverse Self (Longitudinal) Barchan Parabolic
Dome-Shaped Channels
Natural Levees Point Bars Streams, Lakes . & Swamps Channels
Natural Levees
Marsh, Lakes,
Tidal Channels & Tidal Flats
River-Mouth Bars
Beaches & Beach Ridges Tidal Flats
Back Bar, Barrier, Beach, Barrier Face, Spits & Flats Vashover Fans
Beach & Ridges Tidal Flats Tidal Flats Tidal Deltas Shosls & Reefs
Shosls & Banks

A facies can represent a single depositional phase, such as a coarseningupward sequence (e.g., crevasse splay, bayfill, and delta front facies) or a fining-upward sequence (e.g. channel facies). Facies may be vertically stacked such as channel-overbank facies overlain by crevasse splay and backswamp facies. These stacked facies can be cyclically repeated vertically. A facies sequence that has a single process interpretation reflects a specific environment. A coarsening-upward sequence indicates increased waterflow, and fining-upward sequence indicates decreased waterflow. Such waterflow conditions suggest a shallowing crevasse, deltaic environment, and a migrating point bar in a river channel.
Facies associations are genetically related groups that grade or merge into each other, both laterally and vertically. Thus, within an alluvial or delta plain, the facies association may consist of channel-overbank facies laterally grading on either side into floodplain deposits consisting of crevasse splay-lake-backswamp facies (fig. 7). The alluvial facies associations can be repeated upward with the same lateral arrangement; however, the channel-overbank facies may overlie the older floodplain facies. Similar patterns of facies association may be true of a group of deltaic deposits in which the distributary channel-overbank facies is flanked by interdistributary bay-crevasse splay-swamp facies. This facies association may be repeated upward in sequences in which the distributary-overbank facies overlies the older interdistributary bay-crevasse splay-swamp facies. Thus, the nature of a vertical sequence and arrangement of a group of laterally associated facies are controlled by the depositional processes.
The observation of lateral and vertical successions of facies (associations) permits appraisal of their relationships. The patterns of lateral passing of a particular facies into another and the nature of
15

Distributary Mouth Bar

Figure 7.

Diagrammatic reconstruction of coal-foraing swamps and facies relationships in a delta-plain environment in Fennsylvanian rocks of West Virginia, United States. Stop nunbers are itinerary for a field trip in the study area divided into 4 blocked areas. Adopted frota Flores and Arndt, 1979.

16

arrangement of overlying and underlying facies reflect juxtaposition of

interrelated depositional environments. Understanding these relationships is

critical in constructing facies and paleogeographic maps.

FACIES AND PALEOGEOGRAPHIC MAPPING

Interpretations of facies sequences, associations, and relationships

serve as guides in the construction of facies maps and reconstruction of the

paleogeography of the study area. A facies map illustrates the gross areal

distribution of observable properties (such as lithology, thickness, etc.) of

different rock types within a stratigraphic interval. Facies maps are

constructed by drawing lines of equal magnitude that represent measurements of

rock properties or by employing different patterns to indicate major changes

in the geographical distributions of lithology of rock types. Types of facies

maps include isofacies or lithofacies, isolith, percentage, and ratio maps.

These maps are:

- _-__

^

1. An isofacies or lithofacies map (fig. 8 ) is a map that shows the distribution of one or more facies or lithologies within a designated stratigraphic interval.
2. An isolith or isopach map (fig. 9) is a facies map that depicts the net thickness of a single rock type in a given stratigraphic interval.
3. A percentage map (fig. 10) is a facies map that illustrates the relative thickness of a single rock type with respect to the total thickness of a given stratigraphic interval.
4. A ratio map (fig. 11) is a facies map that shows the proportional thicknesses of rock types, such as sandstone-shale, in a given stratigraphic interval.

17

PENNSYLVANIA

-3X0 _ £ -£= "'

SHALE. MARINE SHALE. FRESHWATER SILTY SHALE LIMESTONE CHERTY LIMESTONE FLINT CLAY COAL
10 20 3O 40 MILES

Figure 8.

Fades map of lou-er ?«rt of Allegheny Formation In western Pennsylvania, Unized States. Isopach interval is 20 ft. Adopted Williams and Fera, 1964.

18

500ft
Isopach interval in ft
Figure 9. Isopach and facies naps of Cenozoic fluvial deposits in the Texas . Gulf coast, United States. Isopach lines are in ft. and isopach interval is 10 ft. Adopted from Galloway, 1981.
19

MORONS
10 20 50 40 50 SO 70
Fifurc 10. A sand 'percentage aap of Eocene fluvial deposits in Texas Culf coast. United Scares. Adopted fron Kaiser and others, 1978. The lines of cross sections (F-F f and G-G') constructed froa subsurface data (fcr exasple 7, 66 t 221, etc.) are shown in this reference.
20

:~~~ I : jp -
-N-

NORTH DAKOTA

CXPLANATION
WILL
> IIOMCN INTIRVAl, 100 Ft I l/ll RtTlQ
.i-.-.4 l/lt-l/l IUTIO I/O -1/4 M«TIO 1/4 -i/l iurig CD I/I- I MTIQ INTIMVAL

Flfur* 11. A ratio nap of the interval from upper Cretaceous Greenhorn Formation to lc-jer Cretaceous Lakota Formation in North Dakota, United States. Adopted from Hansen, 1955.

In contrast a paleogeographic map illustrates the reconstructed physical geography at a particular time in the geologic past. Paleogeographic maps include either the generalized former distribution of land and sea, or more specifically in local areas, the orientation and location of interrelated environmental belts such as in fluvial, deltaic, and coastal zones (fig. 12). For example, locations of channels can be identified and mapped with respect to locations of laterally equivalent floodplain or interdistributary environments. The position of the floodplain or interdistributary environments on a paleogeographic map aids in exploration for coals formed in swamps associated with these environments. In addition, it more closely defines the locations of poorly drained swamps where thick coals accumulated in the distal part of a floodplain, and of well-drained swamps where thin coals accumulated in the proximal part of a floodplain adjacent to channel areas. Thus, such coal-forming environments can be established by depositional modeling based on stratigraphic and sedimentologic data.
IMPLEMENTATION OF DEPOSITIONAL MODELING OF THE ITARARE FORMATION AND ASSOCIATED ROCK UNITS
The step-by-step method of depositional modeling described above can be used for the coal-bearing Itarare and Tatui-Rio Bonito Formations. The coal beds are locally concentrated in the middle-upper Itarare Formation in the Buri coal field. The uppermost part of the Itarare Formation or lowermost part of the Tatui Formation contains coal beds in the Cirquilho coal field. These two coal fields make up the major coal-prospecting areas; however, coal is present in the middle-upper part of the Itarare Formation at Monte Mor, and in the upper part of the Itarare Formation north of Itaporanga. The coal beds in the Buri and Cirquilho coal fields are as much as 55 cm thick in the Itarare Formation. The coal beds are bituminous in rank; total sulfur content
22

Marine lim*sten* end lim*y thai*

._

r-*^^"

r m «*

I" J^"""7TVV
I TT^^I'

VANPORTf LIMESTONE IN CUTAWAY
Marine limaston* and limey shale
Figure 12. Co«l-foraing sv«=ps in fluvio-d*Itaic environaeacs of the Allefhwy Fornacioa In Ohio, P«nn«ylv«ni«, «nd West Virginia, United States. Adopted froo Fera, 1970. The lines of cross sections constructed froa stratigraphic sections (for exaaple 1, 2, 3, etc.) are shown In this reference.
23

ranges from 0.4 to more than 10.5 percent, and ash is about 20 to 33 percent (these analyses based on weathered samples).
Preliminary geological work by the Carvao Group of Pr6 Minerio, in the Buri coal field, determined that the Itarare coal beds accumulated in coastaldeltaic swamps. Data from measured sections taken during my field trip in the coal field support a deltaic origin. Outcrops along the drainage of C6rrego do Fazenda Velha west of Buri indicate that two coal beds (7 and 10 cm thick) are overlain by bayfill deposits. These deposits consist of highly bioturbated shale and siltstone overlain by flaserlike, ripple-laminated silty sandstone typical of interdistributary bayfill deposits. This coarsening upward sequence is very similar in characteristics to bayfill deposits in the lower delta plain environment (fig. 7) that is characteristic of Pennsylvanian coal-bearing deposits in the northern Appalachian region of the eastern United States (for example, Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia; Ferm, 1970). Thus, on the basis of the similarity of the bayfill deposits and associated coal facies, it is suggested that the coals exposed in the C6rrego do Fazenda Velha may have accumulated in interdistributary swamps in a lower delta plain environment. However, unlike the deltaic deposits in the northern Appalachians, the deltaic deposits in the Buri coal field contain a large amount of glacial debris as indicated by deposits of dropstones, tillites, and diamictites. The latter two deposits, which consist of pebble-, cobble-, and boulder-size Precambrian rocks floating in a sand-size matrix, can also be interpreted as deposits derived from an anastomosed fluvial system resulting from ice melting, a possible landward depositional continuum of the deltaic environment. However, the glacial influence on the depositional systems in the Itarare Formation is recorded all the way into the shallow marine-prodelta deposits which include pebble to boulder size dropstones.
24

In the Buri coal field, initial deposition modeling can be performed by using all measured sections, cores of drill holes, and geophysical logs as a stratigraphic data base. The first stage of modeling, which consists of stratigraphic synthesis, includes analysis of all vertical facies changes in all measured sections. In addition, all the cores should be described so that downhole lithologic changes can be plotted in graphic logs (see fig. 3). Geophysical logs also should be redescribed in as much detail as possible to record downhole lithologic changes. This work should be followed by preparation of plotted sections that incorporate lithologic logs of rock types and rock sequences (fig. 4) based on their physical properties (internal structures) and evidence of biological activity (burrows). This synthesis serves as the data base for interpreting the environment of deposition or facies of the rock types and rock sequences.
Rock types and rock sequences interpreted for each section, core, and geophysical log form a base for construction of network of cross sectional panels (see fig. 5). The depositional environments of rock types and sequences in each section, core, and geophysical log in cross section panels are then utilized to establish facies associations by comparing and contrasting the vertical and lateral variations of the sequences. The facies associations of each cross section panel, in turn, can be interrelated to other cross sectional panels in the same area, so that facies relationships (fig. 13) in the Buri coal field can be determined.
On the basis of the variations in vertical facies sequences observed in Buri, it" is hypothesized that the coal beds in the vicinity of the C<5rrego do Fazenda Velha probably are associated with lower delta plain deposits. Previous studies of similar deltaic deposits in the central Appalachians of the United States have demonstrated that the economically thick coal beds
25

MC ARTHUR

FENCE DIAGRAM OF PENNSTLVANIAN MODEL CYCLE SHOWING RELATIONSHIP OF LITHIC CONSTITUENTS TO OUTCROP ORIENTATION
GENERALIZED CIOSS SECTION

SANDSTONE t CHARLESTON

EXPLANATION
ALLEGHENY AND UPPER POTTSYILLE
FLINT OUTCROP AREAS OWNAWHA (2)KIL60RE (S)ZALESKI

Figure 13. Facies associaticr.5 £=.2 relationships of the Allegheny Formation in Ohio, Kentucky, a=i West Virginia-, United States. Adopted fro= Cavaroc and Ferr, 1953.

accumulated in the upper delta plain and fluvial environments. Thus, in order to develop a predictive model to explore for minable coal beds in the Buri coal field, it is imperative to employ facies mapping and paleogeographic reconstruction in a second stage of depositional modeling. Percentage maps of sandstone (channel sandstone or channel sandstone and crevasse-splay sandstone) and ratio maps of sandstone-shale are the most important facies maps (figs. 9 and 11) as aids in the modeling work. The areas where sandstone is concentrated will delineate major areas of deposition of the sediments in channels and associated overbank areas as well as the location of floodplains (fig. 9). In contrast, shale areas will define major areas of deposition of the sediments away from channels and overbank areas. Coal beds are preferentially accumulated as thick deposits in fluvio-deltaic, poorly drained swamps (fig. 12) far removed or isolated from major detrital influx (away from channels). Identification of areas of major sandstone and shale accumulations can focus coal exploratory efforts. Isolith or isopach maps of total coal thickness (fig. 14) may delineate the coal basin. Such a map will aid in pinpointing orientation, distribution, and shape of the floodbasin in which the coal accumulated and areas of thick and thin coal, as projected from known and coal-thickness data. These different facies maps can be compared with accompanying isofacies maps that show distribution of all facies types found in interrelated environments. Paleogeographic maps, which (fig. 12) show locations of channels, interdistributary bays, and floodplains, are critical to recognizing seaward and landward related environments. Knowledge of directions of transport of sediments from crossbedding measurements may help to make this observation. Identification of seaward and landward directions from west Buri is particularly significant because the landward upper delta plain-fluvial environments are the target areas for exploration for economic
27

104°35'
37°08

104*50' STARKVILLE

37°06'-

CHANNEL SS COMPLEX STRATIGRAPHIC SECTION ISOPACH LINE IN FEET LINE OF CROSS SECTION INACTIVE MINE

Figure 14. An isopach nap of -otal thickness of coal beds and adjoining distributary channel sandstones in the Vennejo Forsation, Raton Basin, Colorado, United States. Adopted fron Flores and Tur, 1982. The line of cross section constructed froc stratigraphic sections (large dots) are shown in this reference. Area bouttfed by small dots is the ;own of Starkville.

deposits of coal. Thus, the paleogeography of the area provides a basis for defining or predicting the boundaries of environments in which minable deposits of coal were formed.
The step-by-step geological method that has led to depositional modeling in the Buri coal field can be implemented in the Cirquilho coal field. However, there are fewer stratigraphic and sedimentologic data for the Cirquilho coal field than for the Buri coal field. Presently in the Cirquilho coal field, subsurface geophysical logs and cores are the only data available for depositional modeling. The geophysical logs and cores need to be reinterpreted and redescribed and plotted on graphic logs. Outcrop sections remain to be measured, described, and plotted in graphic logs.
My observations of the coal-bearing deposits in the Cirquilho coal field brought out two important aspects. Although exposures of coal have not been observed, mine reports and coal tailings from mining activity indicate the presence of a minable coal bed, perhaps as much as 50 cm thick, in the Cirquilho coal field. A few kilometers from the old mine area, rocks that probably overlie the minable coal bed are exposed in roadcuts; these rocks have interdistributary, lower delta-plain characteristics similar to those in the Buri coal field and in the central Appalachian region, United States. These two observations suggest that, on the basis of facies associations, the coal beds in the Cirquilho coal field may have been deposited in a delta plain environment. The coal deposits in the Cirquilho coal field, however, are stratigraphically higher in the Itarare, Formation or younger in age, than those in the Buri coal field. Whether or not the thick, minable coal bed at Cirquilho coal field is an upper delta plain coal can be determined by facies analysis of additional stratigraphic data. Facies modeling of the rock types in the Cirquilho coal field may help in locating areas of thick, minable coal
29

beds and to delineate the coal body of the Cirquilho mine so that its coal resources can be estimated.
Coal exploration in the Buri coal field should begin by implementation of depositional modeling in the Itarare Formation and associated Tatui-Rio Bonito Formations and later be extended to the Cirquilho coal field. The coal-bearing area in the Monte Mor and the area north of Itaporanga, should be investigated later. The stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and facies data collected in these areas should be utilized to establish a regional facies model of the Itarare and associated formations, which in turn, may provide clues of additional coal-bearing areas.
COAL GEOCHEMISTRY AND QUALITY The geochemistry, especially the sulfur and ash contents of the coal beds in the Buri and Cirquilho coal fields, is directly influenced by their environments of deposition. Previous studies (Williams and Keith, 1963) of mid-continent and Appalachian coal beds in the United States suggest that coal deposits overlain by brackish-water and marine rocks generally contain high amounts of sulfur (fig. 15). In contrast, coals overlain by continental rocks have low sulfur contents. The high sulfur content of coals derived from brackish-water and marine conditions is probably due to increased activity related to sulfur-reducing bacteria. The ash content of coal is controlled mainly by influx of clays and silts into the swamps from channels during flooding or from tidal currents influenced by daily marine processes. Ideally, swamps far removed from centers of active detrital sedimentation will yield lower-ash coal deposits. It is imperative that only fresh coal samples obtained by trenching or coring be submitted for geochemical and ultimate-proximate analyses. Guidelines on collecting coal samples for geochemical and ultimate-proximate
30

PENNSYLVANIA
Limit of Study
s~+s*S s
U/?\ °V x" State College
SULFUR CONTENT OF LDWER K/TTANNING COAL
AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL CLASSIFICATION
OF OVERLYING BEDS CLASSIFICATION OF ROOF BEDS Marine
O 20 30 40 scote miles
Fifurc 15. A aap showing relationship of sulfur content of lower Kittaaing coal and environnenrs of overlying beds is western Pennsylvania. United States. Adopted from Williass and Keith, 19L63.

analyses are listed in Appendix I. The analysis of the geochemistry and quality of Itarar£ coals in the Buri coal field as presented to the author by the Carvao Group of Pr6 Minerio was based mainly on samples collected from outcrops. Previous studies have proved that weathered coal samples do not provide a realistic analysis because mineral matter as well as coal macerals have been exposed to prolonged oxidation. In addition, original moisture, volatile matter, and free carbon in the coal have been liberated during weathering.
32

APPENDIX I GUIDELINES ON COLLECTING COAL SAMPLES FOR CHEMICAL ANALYSIS
By V. E. Swanson and C. Huffman, Jr. (1976) Cut-and-dried instructions on the type, number, and distribution of samples to be collected cannot be given, but some general guidelines should be followed: 1. The judgment of the geologist must be applied toward obtaining samples which will be most representative of the coal bed. 2. Only samples of fresh or unweathered coal should be submitted for analysis, preferably taken from a newly exposed mine face or from cores. The samples should be shipped within a few days after collection to minimize the effect of oxidation and exposure to air on moisture content and forms of sulfur. 3. The objective should be to obtain a complete channel sample of the minable bed; if the coal bed is more than 5 feet thick, a good rule-of-thumb is to collect one sample of each 5-foot interval of coal (for example, four samples of a bed 20 feet thick). Special-type samples will also be analyzed, at the discretion of the geologist. 4. Generally, 4 to 5 pounds of coal should be included in each sample. 5. Plastic bags (10 in. x 15 in. or larger) should be used, and care should be taken to avoid contact of the coal with metal during and after collecting sample (the use of a geologic hammer, of course, cannot be avoided); sample number, date of collection, and key description should be written with a magic marker (permanent ink) on each bag, and on a label attached to the tie on the bag. 6. A rule-of-thumb should be never to collect a single sample from one locality always collect two, or if a mine face is several hundred yards long,
33

collect three channel samples; the main reasons for this collecting of two or three samples are that short-distance composition changes can be assessed, and that possible analytical errors can be spotted.
7. Core samples of coal are better than samples of weathered coal, but contamination by drilling fluids generally makes trace-element analyses unreliable. Name and composition of drilling fluids used should accompany list of core samples submitted for analysis.
8. Shale splits, siltstone partings, or bone coal less than a few inches (5-10 cm) generally should be included in a channel sample if it is probable that this material will be included in mined coal; special samples of these materials should also be collected, based on the judgment of the geologist, to determine their contribution to abnormal element concentrations.
9. If project objectives include the obtaining of knowledge of coal shipped or of plant feed, extra care should be taken to collect at least two representative raw coal, cleaned coal, blend-pile, and conveyor-belt samples; such sample sets should include, where possible, representative samples of furnace-bottom ash, and fly ash from precipitator/scrubber units.
10. If permission to sample is obtained from a company, the offer should be made, and promise kept, to provide a copy of the analytical results to the company; where possible, obtain available analytical data from the company for comparison with your analyses.
34

REFERENCES CITED Cavaroc, V. V., and Perm, J. C., 1968, Siliceous spiculites as shoreline
indicators in deltaic sequences: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 49, p. 263-272. Deutsch, P. C., Ethridge, F. G., Franklin, W. T., Hell, R. D., McWhorter, D. B., and Ortiz, N. V., 1979, Overburden and hydrologic study of SEAM Thunder Basin site, Campbell County, Wyoming: Final Report Part II, Contracts Numbers 16-815-GR and 16-815-GR, United States Department of Agriculture, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 247 p. Ethridge, F. G., Ortiz, N. V., Sanada, D. K., and Tyler, Noel, 1980, Laboratory, field and computer study of the origin of Colorado Plateau type uranium deposits: Second Interim Report for United States Geological Survey Project Number 41-08-000l-G-429, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 36 p. Perm, J. C., 1970, Allegheny deltaic deposits, _iin Morgan, J. P., ed., Deltaic sedimentation, modern and ancient: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Special Publication Number 15, p. 246-255. Flores, R. M., and Arndt, H. H., 1979, Depositional environments in Middle Pennsylvanian Series of proposed Pennsylvania System stratotype, Virginia and West Virginia Field Trip Number 1, Ninth International Congress of Carboniferous Stratigraphy and Geology: American Geological Institute, p. 115-121. Flores, R. M., and Tur, S. M., 1982, Characteristics of deltaic deposits in the Cretaceous Pierre Shale, Trinidad Sandstone, and Vermejo Formation, Raton Basin, Colorado: The Mountain Geologist, v. 19, p. 25-40.
35

Galloway, W. E., 1981, Depositional architecture of Cenozoic Gulf coastal plain fluvial system, ^.n_ Ethridge, F. G., and Flores, F. M., eds., Recent and ancient nonmarine depositional environments models for exploration: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Special Publication Number 31, p. 127-156.
Hansen, D. E., 1955, Subsurface correlations of the cretaceous Greenhorn-Lakota interval in North Dakota: North Dakota Geol. Survey Bull. 29, 46 p.
Harms, J. C., Southard, J. B., Spearing, D. R., and Walker, R. G., 1975, Depositional environments as interpreted from primary sedimentary structures and stratification sequences: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Short Course Number 2, 161 p.
Institute de Pesquisas Tecnologica, 1981, Mapa geologico do estado de Sao Paulo: vol. 1, Prd Mindrio, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 125 p.
Kaiser, W. R., Johnston, J. E., and Bach, W. H., 1978, Sand-body geometry and the occurrence of lignite in the Eocene of Texas, in Hodgson, H. E., ed., Proceedings of the second symposium in the geology of Rocky Mountain coal 1977: Colorado Geological Survey, Resource Series 4, p. 67-87.
LeBlanc, R. J., 1972, Geometry of sandstone reservoir bodies: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 18, p. 133-190.
Swanson, V. E., and Huffman, Claude, Jr., 1976, Guidlines for sample collecting and analytical methods used in the U.S. Geological Survey for determining chemical composition of coal: U.S. Geological Survey Circ. 735, 11 p.
Williams, E. G., and Keith, M. L., 1963, Relationship between sulfur in coals and the occurrence of marine roof beds: Economic Geology, v. 58, p. 720-729.
36

Williams, E. G., and Ferm, J. C., 1964, Sedimentary facies in the lower Allegheny rocks of western Pennsylvania: Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 34, p. 610-614.
37

