If you no longer need this publication write to the Geological Survey in Washington for an official mailing label to use in returning it
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA
PART Vm. CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER) ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142-H

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR J. A. Krug, Secretary
GEOtOGICAi SURVEY W. E. Wrather, Director
Professional Paper 142-H
THE MOLLUSGAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA
By
Julia Gardner
PART VIII. CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER) ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA
Published 1947
(Pages 493 - 656)
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON: 1947
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D. C. Price $1.00

CONTENTS

Page

Introduction i.................................... T.. 493

List of localities.... ............................... 493-494

Systematic descriptions ......................

501

Phylum Mollusca .... .\ ...................

501

C ass Gastropoda ....................

501

C'rder Ctenobranchia ..............

501

Suborder Stenoglossa ........

501

Family Pyrenidae ....

501

Family Muricidae ....

516

Suborder Mesogastropoda ....

533

Superfamily Doliacea .....

533

Family Cytoratiidae ...

533

Family Cassididae .....

536

Family Fieidae ......

539

Superfamily Cypraeacea ..

540

Family Cypraeidae ...

540

Superfamily Naticacea ...

543

Family Naticidae ....

543

Superfamily Strombacea ..

557

Family Strombidae .. .

557

Family Xenophoridae

561

Superfamily Calyptraeacea

561

Family Calyptraeidae

561

Family Capulidae ....

569

Family Hipponicidae .

570

Superfamily Amaltheacea .

571

Family Fossaridae .. .

571

Superfamily Gymnoglossa

571

Family Pyramidellidae

571

Family Melanellidae .

572

Superfamily Ptenoglossa . .

575

Family Epitoniidae . . .

575

Page
Systematic descriptions Continued.
Phylum Mollusca Continued.
Class Gastropoda Continued. 1 Order Ctenobranchia Continued. Suborder Mesogastropoda Continued. Superfamily Ptenoglossa Continued. Family ?Epitoniidae ....... 578 Superfamily Cerithiacea ........ 579 Family Litiopidae .......... 579 Family Modulidae ........... 581 Family Caecidae j ........... 582 Family Vermetid^e .......... 583 Family Architect^nicidae ... 586 Family Turritelliflae ....... 590 Superfamily Rissoaeei ......... 597 Family Vitrinelli( iae ........ 597 Family Synceratiiae ....... 601 Family Rissoinidne ......... 602 Family Rissoidae .......... 606 Order Aspidobranchia ................... 607 Suborder Rhipidoglossa .'........... 607 Superfamily Neritace^ .......... 607 Family Neritidae ........... 607 Superfamily Trochacea ......... 608 Family Tricoliidae ......... 608 Family Turbinidae ......... 610 Family Skeneidat .......... 613 Family Trochidae .......... . 615 Superfamily Zeugobra nchia ..... " 622 Family Fissurelli lae ....... 622
Class Scaphopoda, .......................... 624 Family Dentaliidj e ......... 624 Family Siphonode ntaliidae . . 628
Addenda to Stenoglossa ............................. 631 Index .............................................. 651

ILLUSTRATIONS
PLATES LII-LXI. Gastropoda of thte Alum Bluff Group. ................ LXII. Gastropoda and £caphopoda of the Alum Bluff Group.
II

Page
639-649 650

THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

By JULIA GARDNER

PART VIII. CTENOBRANCHIA (Remainder), ASPIDOBRANC' HIA, and SCAPHOPC: 3^lv|t-

INTRODUCTION

<, ': -

The present chapter continues and completes the study of the faunas of the Alum BSlluufff ggrr< up in Florida and Georgia.
In 1944 the systematic collectio»nns of r Bcent shells in the United States National Museum we e rearranged, in order to bring them into line wdith the results of the later investigations, in large part anatonlical. For purposes of convenience, if for nothing moi e, the general classification of the Tertiary faundaass,. sho aid follow the same pattern as that of the Eecent faunas. Most of the changes involved are in the grpoouups ff< >rmerly under

the abandoned suborder Taenioglossa, and in th^ tw«dfc presumably degenerate groups, CJymnoglossa, which IB? eludes the Pyramidellidae and Melanellidae, and Ptemw / glossa, which includes the large and important faiMiy Epitoniidae. In the older classifications, the Gymooglossa and the Ptenoglossa were given rank coordinate with the Taenioglossa and placed either before or after the Taenioglossa. In the current classification, the Gymnoglossa and the Ptenoglossa are treated as superfamilies and introduced between the Amaltheacea-ancl the Cerithiacea.

LIST OF LOCALITIES

v ^:-°

The following list shows the locealities cited by number in the text and tables (see also> map in Partl,p.2) :
2211. Lower bed, Alum Bluff, east b>aannk Apj ilachicola River, 2 or 3 miles north of Bristol, Liberty County, Fla.
2212. Tenmile Creek, 1 mile we f Bailey j Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.1
2213. 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.2 ,
2214. Tenmile .Creek, 1 mile we f Bailey s Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. 1
2238. Flournoy's millrace, 2 m east of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.3
2302. 2 miles west of Tallahassee, LGeieoonn Con nty, Fla. 2564. McClelland farm, 1 mile 1 v Bailey 5 Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.2
2566. Upper bed, Rock Bluff, SW^ sec. 17, C. 2 N., R. 7 W., east bank Apalachicola River, Liberty County, Fla.
2615. Log landing, farm of Dr. L T. M iClellan (1895), Shoal River, 5 miles west of Mossyhead, Wal on County, Fla.
2645. 1 mile above, a log landing ona farm o f Dr. K. T. McClellan, Shoal River, 5 miles west of Mos syhead, Walton County, Fla.
2646. Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa Co mty, Fla. 2652. Horse Creek, one-half mile above m outh, 1% miles south of Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.
1 Probably at or near the crossing of Stbaatte High vay 84, 4.7 miles north of Clarksville, on the line between sees. 11 and 12, T. 1 N., R. 10 W. ,
2 Type locality of the Chipola formation, sw%sw & sec. 8, T. 1 N.,
R. 9 W., 2% miles east of Carr; west bank£ of Chip la River. 8 NB^4 sec. 84, T. 3 N., R. 18 W., on thee headwa :ers of Hog Creek
nearly half a mile downstream from the rraailroad r ilepost 77, which is nearly a mile southeast of Argyle, Waltoon Count , Fla.

3385. Gastropod Gulch, 4 miles southeast of Bal abridge,

Decatur County, Ga.
3386. Roseland Plantation, 3% miles southeast c f Bafn-

bridge, Decatur County, Ga.

3396. Sam Dickens' field (1900), 7 miles southeast < >f Bain-

bridge, Decatur County, Ga.

;

3419. McClelland farm, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola

River, Calhoun County, Fla.2

3704. Quincy, Gadsden County, Fla.

3731. Near Mossyhead, sec, 6, T. 3 N., R. 21 W., Walton

County, Fla.

3732. Dave Adams' Mill Creek, sec. 2, T. 3 N., R. 211 V., Wal-

ton County, Fla.

3733. Sec. 5, T. 3 N., R. 21 W., three-fottrths mile west of

Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.

3742. Sec. 4, T. 3 N., E. 21 W., 5 miles west of MOsi3yh«ad,4

Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.

3748. Summerville millrace, 1 mile east of Argyle, Walton

County, Fla.3

3856. Sec. 6, T. 3 N., R. 21 W., 6 miles west-north west of

Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.

x

5079. One-half mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton,

GtwjBty, Fla.

--.

5080. First ravine below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton

County, Fla.

5184. First ravine below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Waltont~ County, Fla.

* Type locality of the Shoal River formation, Shell Bluff, no rth bank of Shoal River, E% sec. 4, T. 8 N,, R. 21 W., 3% miles C^irtiae) N. 25<> W. of Mossyhead and three-quarters ot a mile east «l Godwin
«:Bridge. Base of shell bed, 42 feet above the river and about 1-S5 feet
above sea level.

494 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

5193. Crowder's' Crossing, 1% miles below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.5
5194. 1% miles below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.
5195. First ravine below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.
5618. '3*4 miles southwest of De Fuuiak Springs, Walton County, Fla.
5630. 100 yards below Oak Grove Bridge, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.
5631. Oak Grove Bridge, Yellow lliver, Okaloosa County, Fla.
5632. Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla" 5633. Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. 6175. Left bank of Suwannee River three-fourths mile above White Springs, Columbia County, Fla. 7054. 400 feet below bridge, Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla. 7055. Old Senterfeit mill, 4% miles southwest of Laurel Hill, Walton County, Fla.6 7148. Gastropod Gulch, 5% miles southeast of Bainbridge, Decatur County, Ga. 7151. Tenmile Creek, Calhoun County, Fla. 1 7183. Alum Bluff (lower bed), Liberty'County, Fla. 7256. Look and Tremble Shoals, Chipola River, Calhoun Comnty, Fla.7 7257. Sexton's marl bed, Tenmile Creek, sec. 11, T. 1 N., E. 10 W., Calhoun County, Fla. 7261. Upper Alaqua Lethu (?) Bluff, near De Funiak Springs, Walton County, Fla.7 7264. De Funiak Cardium beds, Alaqua Creek, Walton County, Fla.7 7468. Sopchoppy, Wakulla County, Fla.
7893. Boynton Landing, Choctawhatchee River, Washington County, Fla.
5 C. Wythe Ceoke, 1945, identifies Crowder's Crossing with the old ford in Shoal River, one-fourth mile below Godwin Bridge.
«C. Wythe Cooke, 1945, identifies the old Senterfeit mill with Tanner's mill and places it in see. 15, T. 5 N., R. 23 W., 4% miles southwest of Laurel Hill, Walton County, Fla.
7 Cannot be located more exactly.

9957. Gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle and 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
9958. Site of Flournoy's old mill, about 1% miles northeast of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.
9959. One-fourth mile west by north of Pleasant Ridge Church, 5.2 miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, Walton
County, Fla. 9960. Folks Creek, sec. 21 or 22, T. 3 N., R. 18 W., 6 miles
south of Argyle and 1.7 miles from Eucheeanna, Walton County,
Fla. 9961. Horse Creek, iy2 miles south of Oak Grove, .Okaloosa
County, Fla. 10288. Alum Bluff, Apalachicola River, Liberty County, Fla. 10603. Gully south of the road and east of the bridge over
Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle and 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
10608; Whites Creek, one-half mile below bridge on Eucheeanaa-Knox Hill road, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.
10609. The Woodyard, three-fourths mile above Shell Landing, Holmes Creek, Washington County, Fla. (lower bed).
10612. Chester Spence's farm, 5 miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, at head of Sconters Mill Creek, Walton County, Fla.
10659., Tanner's mill (old Senterfeit mill), 4'miles southwest of Laurel Hill, Okaloosa County, Fla.
10661. Godwin Bridge over Shoal River, 5 to 6 miles northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.
10662. Lower bed, Shoal River, between Godwin Bridge and Shell Bluff, 5 to 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.
10971. Turtle Lake Bluff, about 150 yards above mouth of Fourmile Creek, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
14436. Gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle and 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. Collection made by the Geological Survey of the State of Florida and presented to the United States Geological Survey.

Distribution of Ctenobranchia (in part), Aspidobranchia, and Scaphopoda in the Alum Bluff group of Florida and Georgia [pr, Prolific; a, abundant; c, common; p, present; r, rare. The localities within each State and formation are arranged in geographic order from north, to south and from west to east]

Georgia Oak Grove sand

Florida Chipola formation

Florida OabfiKwe, sand

Speeies

JHUonihvpeknrsisatys 3386 3385 7148 3396 10609 7893 2212 2214 7257 2213 2564 3419 7151 7256 10971 2211 7183 2566 3704 2302 10288 7468 Acolderciteohn,

ft? UCnoirvnerslity
2646 5632 5631 5630 5633 7054 2652 7055 9961 10659 colections

Mil? Mifr
1

s

i

, ialli (Maury). . ,

... . .._. ..... . - _

i

Stroi iJdrichi (Maury)

..

1 M' ur< Murex) gilli (Maury>

. ... . ....

Chicoreus) aldricM Gardner, n. sp.

.

Pazi*dla (BaUimurex) lychnia Gardner, n. sp._.. ._......_

Ken
TypI ,
_ V"
Mat tiros
nistris Gardner, a. sp,. -'.

. _. _ . _ . '

'* ....... '
r '~

Eupleura pteriod Gardner, n, sp.
P«ZK
Seini SeoaBajjsaralaietigfttft Gardner, n. sp. ....,_ .......;:__...... ...,_..
an (Oniscidia) ?hipolanum (Ball ms) Gardner, n. sp... .Kc»
Ma (Cypmorbis)1 beUwiiiu IWL

1>

j.~

Triv a chipolana Maury.___..;.....'_'.._t._..,,........^.^_i..._

I...

vaughaiii Gardner; n. sp. .__^.*~...__._............._. .4......

.Irati

Q
~
........

P ....... r e. P P P

cPP

P ........ .......

..... P P 0 ....... ...... PPP

.

Pr ?r P

P

P

0Pr

rP

---- ._...... . _..

P
P

?r

._......... ........

....... c P P PPr P

P ....... P

P Pr r r

........ 1 -
P P ....._

PrP P r ......

v .......

1 .'

«.

.

-

........ r 1

P to

ft

....... '

.... "r ...., * "

II __

E:

r':

J.
L i:;i

?r
........... .._. -- ....... ...... P

- .......

........

.......

....,.
P .;....,.

....... .... ,. ......:. ........ P

- -----
i::L.'__
»...;.

P
P
t

r . i.

.......

i ?r ^-,:. ..w.;-~
~4r T. rr-" -
iS

P

" -» ~

» II

r?3r .|. ZI r-~

..11
,;-,-,

".III

ni

§
H 12! O td
I
1O

Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University

anoao

nniy ,10

Aldrich collection, [ Johns Hopkins University
NVOSQTIOH

varaoii ,10 .mono

wmv HIM ,10 Vi\[nv,i NVOSHTIOW

86?

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

499

11j p ^ * 2? *S 2

***'

£ <B

f ai ?i 1-d I

fp }:1ii<I" j rL» i I |i Nll §^'friBli£ i tll >1 ; 1I5 [^|i a. i«?-»P1I

I'.1 t'

'1 r[ rf.Ir\r I-1 i. * I II ri t|li '! iij.:i!I i 1 1!'1r'sIg i ?! | f, ll i i-s(Gp.Gn_i.anari.fd.onri.mleari),s 8 » > M(Ls.a_uen.vtraiydo.esna.tlu.im.)
3 : tJ t?'

i.i 3-

| L(Rilinpma-pfaiVntufil*)a 5 1 ^l

T rGnanaenar.dbnaseirs,Gsnflaupmrde.nnvaedurm, 3*

3

1' 9

=

113 §» i9 x-

D
\,

s

1.

1?
3S

!|E i3' 3 ' 3

i i : 1 r1 3-.§

* ; i^P r3 3
I 1 rr S5

:P § <«>

^g uGnamprde,n.keorn,
(ORlmixmtpn)hlaiaftli1"ni"s\1)
£,C
3-
i ?

I i
jx
sGneDoapnmraTdmi.n,er, » H- f

32 3

3

P

(cDhipaolaln)a

1 3

3O -

^I
i3-"lr *I. 1a3., si-

j ()._M.A.s_tar._eu.a.dr_a.yl_i

£. '

3

>i»3

: !

3. (GsjMpRnu.air.na.rdisc..on.einar,)

3-

33

3

=> 3

3

1| d

i ?
9§_' 1 3 '

i,
3
?
13
1
3
9

I3

«3
fi B 3

1

1'

|

i

a n 13 a
-*

i | ! S
i *S
i .:
: i i
OP
i
i
-*
-
i~c n
:
! 1 1
i
i i : ;
i
j : i i ; : : i

«
-
t-i

dn
-

^

i
O5 OMS
£
to en
CO
Sto3 *to!
CO
3
5
00
0 en
s
en
i 1
1 I
to en
CO CO
|
00 CO
£
CCDD
§ 3
1'
CCDD
§ §
cn

SO

3 §"

ts

i
1.
Ed
1

*r1
1

|
nn
i
i
! | i 1i

* i

I>-(

5
OS
,_,
§ 00 0e3n 00

fB
B 5'
*a
O
B

1i

O

to
1(O

i

Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University

Jiioao jLims Ha^v

NVOSHTIOH

002

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

501

SYSTEMATIC DESCRIPTIONS
Phylum MOLLUSCA
Class GASTEOPODA
Order CTENOBRANCHIA
Suborder STENOGLOSSA
Family PTTBENIDAE
Genus MITRELLA Risso
1826. Mitrella Risso, Histoire naturelle des principales productions de 1'Europe meridionale, vol. 4, p. 247.
Type by subsequent designation (Cox, Kept. Paleontology Zanzibar, Moll., p. 28, 1927) : Mitrella fiaminea Hisso = Mureao scriptus Linnaeus. Recent in the Mediterranean.
Shell dense, rather small, fusiform. Spire elevated, the whorls evenly tapering. Protoconch small, smooth, blunt, paucispiral. Sculpture restricted to the feeble striae that gird the pillar and the anterior fasciole. Aperture rather narrow. Outer lip thickened a little, feebly emarginate posteriorly; denticulate within. Parietal wash moderately heavy. Pillar feebly rugose. Anterior canal not denned, the fasciole little or not at all expanded. Terminal notch U-shaped, oblique.
The Recent representatives are widely distributed in the warm and shallow waters.
Mitrella pedana Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIT, figure 9
Shell small, fusiform; the maximum diameter falling a little in front of the median horizontal. Aperture nearly half as long as the entire shell. Body smoothly rounded at the base. Spire tapering somewhat irregularly to an obtuse apex; postnuclear whorls trapezoidal, sharp-edged posteriorly. Whorls of conch 4, closely wound, separated by distinctly impressed linear sutures. Protoconch small, smooth, highly polished, twice coiled; initial turn inflated, immersed at the tip; succeeding volution becoming decreasingly convex toward its close. Dividing line between conch and protoconch indicated by a slight axial thickening at the close of the protoconch and by the change in the texture of the shell. Incremental striae microscopically fine, more or less flexuous. Spirals, 4 or 5, low, rounded, closely spaced on the base of the body and the pillar, merging gradually into an equal number of more sharply rounded but finer lirations, which crowd the anterior fasciole. Aperture of moderate width, acutely angulated behind. Outer lip almost vertical from the commissure to the base, feebly emarginate at the posterior siphonal fasciole; a broad and ill-defined axial thickening developed a little behind the thin, sharp margin; inner surface reinforced with about half a dozen elongated denticles that increase in prominence from the anterior to the posterior, which is placed a

little in front of the siphonal notch. Inner margin of aperture smoothly and strongly concave. Parietal wash thin. Pillar wash heavier, commonly rugose. Inner margin of pillar sharply keeled, the keel developing within the aperture into a well-defined marginal fold. Anterior canal very short, broad. Terminal notch broad, shallow, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 4.7 millimeters; length of aperture, 2.0 millimeters; maximum diamqter, 2.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U.S. Nat. Mus. No. 371840. Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed at Alum Bluff, Apalachicola River, Liberty County, Fla. The conch of M. pedana is fusiform, with no remarkable characters, but the protoconch includes fewer volutions and is more obtuse than that of any other of the allied Chipola forms. The initial turn of the protoconch, instead of being flattened and almost entirely* immersed in the succeeding volution, as in most of the species of Columbellopsis, is inflated and immersed only at the tip. The thickening of the labrum of the adult conch is also more slight than in the allied section. The anterior portion of the body whorl in Mitrella pedana is sp feebly constricted that a reference to the section Columbellopsis does not seem justified. In the relatively few whorls and broad conical spire the species recalls Mitrella lunata (Say), of the Recent East Coast, and Mitrella ocellata (Gmelin), of the Caribbean fauna. The species is abundant at the type locality. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211a.
Section COLT7MBELLOP3I8 Bucquoy, Dautzenberg, and DoHfus
1882. Columbellopsis Bucquoy, Dautzenberg, and Dollfus, Mollusques marins du Roussillon, vol. 1, p. 77.
=Atilia auetores not Atilia H. & A. Adams, Genera Recent Mollusca, vol. 1, p. 184, 1853. Type by subsequent designation (Pace, Mal. Soc. London, Proe., vol. 5, p. 42, 1902) : Columbella suffusa Sowerby. Recent in the Pacific.
Type by original designation: Columbella minor Scacchi. Recent, Pleistocene, and Tertiary of the Mediterranean region.
Shell small, slender, with moderately elevated spire and a body abruptly constricted into a short and wide canal. Nucleus small, smooth, blunt, paucispiral. . Whorls of spire closely appressed, regularly increasing in height and diameter. Surface smooth except for the lirations girding the. pillar. Aperture rather narrow, obtusely angulated posteriorly. Outer lip varicose, sharp-edged but denticulate within, the posterior notch perceptible. Parietal wash thinly spread over a narrow area. Inner margin of pillar oblique, not plicate nor acutely compressed. Anterior siphonal fasciole little or not at all expanded, strongly lirate. Terminal notch narrow, obliquely directed.

502 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Atilia has been used by many workers for the shells here included under Columbellopsis. The Adamses selected no type but listed 7 species, arranged alphabetically. The first named species, C. conspersa Gaskoin, has been commonly accepted, though there has been apparently no designation. Cossmann in 1901 cited Mitrella minor Scacchi as the type of Atilia,, but minor was not included in the original list of the Adams species. Pace in 1902 cited "C. suffusa, Sby., selected by Chenu, 1859." Chenu named the species only as an "example," not a type, so the designation must date from Pace's citation in 1902. In case the question of the validity of Pace's unwitting designation should be raised, Grant and Gale, in 1931, made a formal designation of Columbella suffusa Sowerby as the type of Atilia and placed Atilia in the synonymy of Anachis H. & A. Adams, 1853.
The differences which separate Columbellopsis from Mitrella the constriction of the base of the outer lip to form a defined canal and the stronger tendency toward a terminal varix are of no more than sectional value. In the large group of Alum Bluff Mitrella, indeed, the line drawn seems so arbitrary that even a section separation places an overemphasis on the differences.
Judging from the distribution charts of the Alum Bluff, the section Columbellopsis and the genus Strombina are in large measure mutually exclusive, for Columbellopsis is characteristic of the Chipola fauna and Strombina of the Shoal River. The contrast in the make-up of the Chipola and Shoal River faunas is peculiarly striking in the Pyrenidae. In the collections which have been reviewed the number of individuals of Strombina in the Shoal River greatly exceeds the number of Columbellopsis in the Chipola, and yet the number of species of Columbellopsis involved is three times as great as the number of species of Strombina. Apparently the Shoal River fauna was one well adapted to a rather unusual environment, while the conditions under which the Chipola species lived must have been more varied and less favorable to any single group. Two out of the' twelve species recorded from the Chipola are known only from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, and like so many of the Alum Bluff species they are coarser and more rudely sculptured forms than their Chipola River analogues.
I have been unable to construct a key for Mitrella and the section Columbellopsis that would simplify the difficulties of their determination.

tened, evenly converging. Tip broken away in all available material. Conch including probably 5 volutions, although the apex is decorticated and the exact number doubtful. Posterior edge of whorls sharp; sutures distinct. Protoconch imperfectly preserved, of moderate dimensions and including 3 or 4 volutions. Sculpture restricted to 6 or 7 low, flattened lirae that gird the pillar and anterior fasciole. Aperture rather narrow, sinuous, acutely angulated posteriorly. Outer lip feebly emarginate at the posterior fasciole, broadly and smoothly arching in front of the siphonal notch, smoothly but sharply rounding into the base, little or not at all thickened externally, reinforced internally; two rather prominent denticles, the posterior the more elevated, developed in the type a little in front of the notch. Inner margin of the aperture abruptly constricted at the base of the body. Parietal wash thin except directly in front of the commissure, merging into the heavier feebly rugose pillar callus. Pillar short, the inner margin sharply keeled. Anterior canal short, recurved. Terminal notch broad, shallow, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 6.0- millimeters; length of aperture, 2.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.1 millimeters.
Holotype: U.S. Nat. Mus. No. 371842. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. The outer lip is more strongly emarginate at the posterior fasciole than in Mitrella tytha, more flaring in front of the fasciole, and less evenly lirate within. M. stikta from the Chipola is a close analogue. The general outline and dimensions of the two species are similar, but in the Chipola form, the spirals on the base of the body and pillar are more numerous, more elevated, and more sharply denned than in Mitrella juncea, the emargination at the posterior siphon is more shallow, the labrum less expanded anteriorly, and the obscure marginal fold upon the pillar is delimited by a shallow groove. Mitrella nanna, also from the Chipola, is smaller than M. juncea and even more slender. Mitrella juncea is not at all common even at the single locality from which it has been collected. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3742P.
Mitrella tytha Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 24

Mitrella juncea Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 17
Shell small, polished, slender, elongate-conic. Aperture decidedly less than half as high as the entire shell. Body rather sharply rounded at the periphery, constricted into the short neck. Sides of spire flat-

Shell small, highly polished, slender, elongate-conic. Aperture less than half as long as the entire shell. Body obtusely angulated at the periphery, the posterior portion of the body and the spire evenly and gradually tapering to the subacute apex. Whorls of conch between 4 and 5, sharp-edged posteriorly, separated by feebly impressed sutures. - Protoconch moderately large in

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

503

comparison with the conch, somewhat turbinate: component whorls 4, the initial turn minute, flattened behind, largely immersed in the succeeding volution; the remaining whorls low, increasing in diameter with a moderate degree of rapidity, rather strongly constricted at the sutures except toward the close of the protoconch. Dividing line between conch and protoconch irregular, the opening of the conch indicated by the flattening of the whorl and by a change in the texture of the shell. A color pattern occasionally retained of rather heavy, brownish lines, rudely parallel to the axis, somewhat broken, and, on the body, sinous like the outer margin of the labrum. Spiral sculpture restricted to 1 or 2 feebly incised lines on the extreme base of the body and 3 to 5 low, subequal threads girding the pillar and anterior fasciole. Aperture rather narrow, sinuous, acutely angulated behind. Outer lip feebly constricted directly in front of the commissure, flaring at the periphery of the body, not thickened externally but reinforced within with 6 or 7 lirations, the anterior very feeble and set at the entrance to the canal; the other denticles increasing in prominence posteriorly up to their abrupt disappearance a little in front of the posterior notch. Inner margin of aperture rather strongly concave. Pillar short. Parietal and pillar wash rather thin, continuous, heaviest directly in front of the commissure and on the pillar, which in the fully adult is minutely denticulate. Inner margin of pillar keeled but not elevated into a distinct fold. Anterior canal not differentiated. Terminal notch broad, shallow, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 5.0 millimeters; length of aperture, 2.0 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus.No. 371843. Type locality: No. 5079, Half a mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. Mitrella tytha is not so slender nor so highly polished as M. photeina, from the Chipola and is less evenly rounded and less attenuated anteriorly. The neck is shorter and broader than in photeina, and the outer lip is more expanded and more evenly lirate within. M. juncea from the Shoal River is more elevated, and the spire is relatively higher. M. mikra from the Oak Grove runs smaller and is more slender, but the general characters of the two species are similar and the color patterns close, though that of the Oak Grove form is apparently the more broken and irregular. Mitrella tytha is common at the type locality but rare elsewhere. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 5079C, 3733r, 756181'.
Mitrella photeina Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 25
Shell small, lustrous, slender, elongate-conic. Aperture nearly half as high as the entire shell. Body

whorl smoothly and evenly rounding into the broad pillar. Whorls 5 in the adult conch, those of the spire closely appressed, trapezoidal, gradually increasing in diameter, sharp-edged posteriorly and separated by sharply defined linear sutures. Protoconch smooth, highly polished, moderately large in proportion to the conch, including between 3% and 4 volutions; initial turn inflated, immersed at the tip; remaining volutions increasing in diameter and altitude with a moderate degree of rapidity but decreasing in convexity. Dividing line between conch and protoconch irregular, obscure because of the high polish of both the nuclear and postnuclear turns. Surface smooth except for microscopically fine incremental striae, 3 or 4 low, flattened cords upon the extreme base of the body and the pillar, and an* equal number of more closely and evenly spaced threadlets upon the anterior fasciole. Aperture narrow, sinuous, obtusely angulated at the commissure. Outer lip broadly emarginate at the posterior fasciole, almost vertical in front of the sinus, rounding abruptly into the anterior fasciole. Labrum thickened a little behind the margin, somewhat produced posteriorly, denticulate within; the denticles evenly spaced, increasing regularly in prominence from the anterior tooth near the entrance to the canal, to the posterior, directly in front of the posterior fasciole. Inner margin of aperture concave, most heavily glazed in front of the commissure and along the short, slightly rugose pillar. Inner margin of pillar keeled and obscurely plicate. Terminal notch broad, rather deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 5.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 2.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.1 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371844. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Perry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Mitrella photeina is remarkable for its high polish and slender, smoothly rounded outline. M. oryzoides, the most common of the Chipola Mitrellas, is smaller and not so slender, and the whorls are not so flattened laterally. Mitrella, tytha, from the Shoal River is broader at the anterior extremity and more squarely truncate, and the outer lip is more expanded toward the base of the body. Apparently there was a broad band of a darker color on the posterior portion of the whorl, with possibly darker and rather distant lineations on the lighter anterior portion, but there is no trace of the suture-to-suture lines that apparently furnished the color pattern in M. tytha. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213».
Mitrella inikra Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 20
Shell minute, polished, slender, elongate-conic. Aperture almost half as long as the entire shell. Body ob-

504 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

tusely angulated, flattened behind the periphery, constricted in front into the broad, ill-differentiated pillar. Sides of spire flattened and evenly tapering to the subacute apex. Whorls of conch 3%, sharp-edged behind, separated by feebly impressed sutures. Protoconch smooth, moderately large relatively, including 4 volutions; initial turn minute, partially immersed in the succeeding turn; remaining whorls increasing regularly in diameter and altitude but decreasing in convexity. Dividing line between conch and protoconch broken; opening of conch indicated by the lower surface polish and the increased flattening of the whorl. Traces of an axial color pattern of irregular brownish bands still retained. Spiral sculpture reduced to 2 or 3 linear grooves girding the base of the pillar and an equal number of ill-defined thread^ on the anterior fasciole. Aperture moderately wide for so minute a shell, narrow and acutely angulated behind. Outer lip very slightly constricted at the posterior fasciole, thinedged and inclined to flare a little toward the. base, produced and thickened somewhat posteriorly but with no well-defined labral varix; 2 or 3 denticles developed on the posterior medial portion of the inner surface. Labium sharply constricted at the base of the body. Parietal wash very thin except directly in front of the commissure. Pillar short, straight, heavily glazed; inner margin keeled. Anterior canal not differentiated. Anterior extremity obliquely emarginate.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 1.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.7 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371846.
Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.
Mitrella mikra is a very small and regular little cone the analog in the Oak Grove fauna of the larger, less slender, but similarly contoured M. tytha of the Shoal River. M. oryzoides, the common Mitrella of the Chipola, runs about the same dimensions, but the whorls are not so much flattened laterally nor so regularly coiled, and there is a canal sufficiently defined to justify its reference to the section Columbellopsis. There is also in oryzoides a marked flexure in the suture line a little behind the aperture because of the encroachment of the thickened portion of the labrum upon the penultima. In M. mikra, on the other hand, the labrum is little or not at Till thickened and the suture line little or not at all sinuated.
M. mikra is one of the few representatives of the genus in the Oak Grove fauna, but it is rather abundant and widely distributed at that single horizon.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646C, 5632*>, 5631P, 7054P.

Mitrella oryzoides Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 19
Shell minute, elongate-conic, the maximum diameter falling in front of the median horizontal. Aperture less than half as high as the entire shell. Body whorl smoothly rounding into the broad neck. Whorls of conch 4, those of the spire flattened laterally, sharpedged posteriorly, closely appressed and slowly increasing in diameter, separated by impressed sutures. Protoconch highly polished, rather large relatively, including between 3y2 and 4 volutions; initial turn minute, flattened behind, very largely immersed in the succeeding turn; remaining nuclear turns increasing rapidly in diameter and altitude; dividing line between conch and protoconch irregular, father obscure. Spiral sculpture restricted to 3 or 4 low cords merging into* the 2 or 3 more sharply defined lirations upon the anterior fasciole. Aperture narrow, obliquely lobate. Outer lip broadly emarginate posteriorly, flaring slightly in front of the notch; external thickening slight, indicated, however, by the encroachment of the thickened portion on the preceding turn; on the inner surface, about half a dozen short, subequispaced lirations that increase regularly in prominence from the anterior at the mouth of the canal to the posterior directly in front of the siphonal notch. Inner margin of aperture constricted at the base of the body. Parietal and pillar wash rather heavy for so small and thin a shell. Pillar finely denticulate, bearing a marginal fold, which usually flattens out, however, before reaching the aperture. Anterior canal short, broad, not sharply defined. Terminal notch shallow.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.8 millimeters; length of aperture, 1.4 millimeters; maximum diameter^ 1.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371845.
Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry? Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
Mitrella oryzoides is by far the most common representative of the genus in the Chipola. It is smaller than most other Columbellopsis but is apparently mature. The whorls are not so flattened nor so regularly coiled as in either the coexistent photeina or in. mikra, the closely allied species of Mitrella from the Oak Grove. There is also a characteristic sinousity itt the suture on the last quarter turn of M. oryzoides, SL bending backward around the thickened portion of the labrum, and then a forward turn to the commissure. Mitrella nanna is more slender, and the sutures are deeply impressed or even channeled.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 7257% 2213C, 2564P, 3419?, 7151P.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

505

Mitrella iianna Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 22
Shell small and very slender, elongate-conic, the sides of the spire converging slowly toward the subacute apex. Aperture less than half as high as the entire shell. Body sharply rounded at the periphery, constricted rather abruptly into the short, broad neck. Whorls of conch 4% to 5 in number, flattened laterally, sharp-edged behind, separated by impressed sutures that are often channeled by weathering. Protoconch rather large relatively, including in the type 3 volutions; initial turn low, flattened behind; remaining whorls increasing both in diameter and altitude with a moderate degree of rapidity, broadly inflated except for the final half turn. Dividing line between conch and protoconch irregular, indicated by the increased flattening of the whorl and the lower luster of the conch. Spiral sculpture reduced to about half a dozen rather obscure and irregular lirations on the pillar and anterior fasciole. Aperture sinuous, obtusely angulated posteriorly. Outer lip broadly emarginate at the posterior siphonal fasciole, thin-edged and flaring in front of the fasciole; labrum somewhat heavier behind the margin but not varicose or sufficiently thickened to affect the contour of the whorl; inner surface lirate, the lirae 4 or 5 in number, subequal and equispaced, persisting far within the aperture. Labium sharply excavated at the base of the body. Parietal and pillar wash moderately heavy for so small a shell, especially on the pillar; a small drop of callus deposited on the body wall directly in front of the commissure. Pillar not denticulate, sharply keeled along the inner margin, the keel probably developing within the aperture into a well-defined marginal fold. Anterior canal short, broad, not well differentiated. Terminal notch moderately deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 4.0 millimeters; length of aperture, 1.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371847. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Mitgella nanna may be known by its small size, slender outline, and deeply impressed OP even channeled sutures. The most closely allied species is M. oryzoides, which it approaches so nearly that the end members are with difficulty separable. The typical nanna are isolated from typical oryzoid.es by the more slender outline, relatively shorter body, the more evenly tapering spire, and more deeply impressed sutures. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213p.
Mitrella stikta Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 23
Shell small, highly polished, -slender, elongate-conic, the spire evenly and gradually tapering to a subacute

apex. Aperture less than half as long as the entire shell. Body whorl obtusely angulated at the periphery, flattened behind. Whorls of conch 5, those of the spire trapezoidal, sharp-edged posteriorly, separated by impressed sutures. Protoconch smooth, highly polished, including 4 volutions; initial turn well rounded, partially immersed in the succeeding whorl; remaining nuclear turns increasing more rapidly in diameter than in height, not quite so much flattened laterally as the whorls of the conch. Close of protoconch defined by a distinct but irregular line. Axial sculpture not developed ; traces still retained, however, of an axial color pattern of broken and more or less zigzag lines. Spiral sculpture restricted to about 8 subequal, linearly spaced cords on the extreme base of the body and the pillar and 3 or 4 finer lirations on the anterior fasciole. Aperture narrow, slightly oblique, angulated behind. Outer lip smoothly emarginate at the posterior fasciole, flaring slightly in front of the fasciole; lip thin and sharp at the outer edge, thickened a little behind the margin and produced backward on the preceding whorl. Inner surface corrugated with 6 or 7 elongate denticles, the posterior set a little in front of the siphonal fasciole, the anterior at the entrance to the anterior, canal; the 2 posterior denticles more prominent than those in front. Labium excavated at the base of the body. Parietal and pillar wash thin and smoothly applied. Pillar short, bearing an obscure marginal fold delimited by the groove behind it. Anterior canal rather narrow, recurved. Terminal notch broad, shallow, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 5.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 2.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.1 millimeters,
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371841. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Mitrella stikta is a peripheral species that might be assigned with almost equal propriety to the section Columbellopsis or to Mitrella s.s. The slight thickening of the outer lip is in some individuals emphasized" by exaggerated incrementals, but there is no well-defined varix. The lirations that gird the extreme base of the body and the pillar are more elevated, more sharply defined, and commonly more numerous than in any of the other Alum Bluff species of Mitrella. The type is the only known representative of the species. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.
Mitrella sima Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 10
Shell small, slender, elongate-conic, the body abruptly constricted into the narrow neck, which is sharply recurved at the extremity. Aperture approximately half as long as the entire shell. Whorls of conch 4%

506 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

to 5 in number, flattened laterally, rather sharp-edged indicated merely by an irregular break and by the re-

posteriorly, separated by feebly impressed linear su- duced polish of the conch. Axial sculpture restricted

tures. Protoconch rather small, smooth, very highly to microscopically fine incremental striae. Spiral

polished, including about 3 volutions. Initial turn sculpture of half a dozen rather coarse cords on the

minute, flattened behind, largely submerged in the suc- extreme base of the body and the pillar, becoming less

ceeding whorl; remaining whorls increasing more coarse and more closely spaced anteriorly and grading

rapidly in diameter than in height. Dividing line be- into the 3 linearly spaced threads on the anterior fasci-

tween conch and protoconch distinct, irregular. Spiral ole. Aperture narrow, sinuous, acutely angulated pos-

sculpture restricted to 4 to 6 rounded, closely spaced teriorly. Outer lip little or not at all constricted in

threads girding the extreme anterior portion of the front of the commissure, flaring slightly near the base.

body and the'pillar and an equal number of finer, more Labral varix rude, slightly produced posteriorly; mar-

crowded lirae upon the anterior fascicle. Aperture gin thin and sharp; denticles on the inner surface most

narrow, sinuous, angulated behind. Outer lip emargin- prominent in the medial portion of the lip, very fine

ate at the posterior fascicle, flaring slightly in front of anteriorly. Labium sharply contracted at the base of

the fascicle; sharp-edged but reinforced a little behind the body. Parietal wash thin except for an irregular

the margin by a well-defined varical riblet encroaching deposit directly in front of the commissure. Pillar

somewhat upon the preceding whorl, delimited laterally short, straight, reinforced, finely denticulated just with-

by a shallow, ill-defined depression. Inner surface rein- in the outer margin of the wash. Inner margin of pil-

forced with about half a dozen equispaced, elongate lar keeled and slightly elevated, thus forming a slender

denticles that increase regularly in prominence from marginal fold. Anterior canal short, recurved. Term-

the anterior at the entrance to the anterior canal to inal notch broad, moderately deep, obliquely directed.

the posterior, set a little in front of the posterior Dimensions of holotype: Height, 6.3 millimeters;

siphonal notch. Labium excavated at the base of the length of aperture, 2.6 millimeters; maximum diameter,

body. Parietal wash thin. Pillar glaze also thin but 2.5 millimeters.

dense and obscurely and very finely denticlate. Inner Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371838.

margin of pillar keeled. Anterior canal short, recurved. Type locality: No. 7893, Boynton Landing, Chocta-

Terminal notch rather broad and not very deep.

whatchee Eiver, Washington County, Fla.

Dimensions of holotype: Height, 4.2 millimeters; Mitrella belonis may be recognized by its small size,

length of aperture, 2.0 millimeters; maximum diameter, slender Strombina-like outline and acutely tapering

1.8 millimeters.

multiwhorled spire. Mitrella dalli is almost twice as

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371839.

long and has a more attenuated anterior extremity.

Type locality: No. 3419, McClelland farm, west bank The young of dalli of the same length as belonis are

Chipola River, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun sharply carinated at the periphery of the body. Mitrella

County, Fla.

dallina is relatively more slender and the anterior canal

Mitrella sima is readily separable from the two other is longer than in M. belonis.

Columbellopsis of comparable dimensions by the well- Mitrella belonis is rare at the single locality from

defined labral varix and recurved anterior canal:

which it has been collected.

Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213p, Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 7893r.

2564P, 3419C.

Mitrella belonis Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 11
Shell small, lustrous, slender, acutely tapering. Aperture less than half the length of the shell. Whorls of the spire sharp-edged behind, conspicuously flattened laterally, increasing slowly and regularly in diameter. Body whorl relatively stout, rounding rather sharply into the broad neck. Whorls of the conch closely appressed, probably 6, separated by feebly impressed sutures. Apex somewhat decorticated. Protoconch small, subacute, possibly including as many as 4 volutions ; initial turn minute and almost entirely immersed in the succeeding whorl; remaining nuclear turns feebly convex, increasing gradually in diameter and height. Dividing line between conch and protoconch

Mitrella blastos Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 12
Shell small, fusiform, the maximum diameter falling a little in front of the median line. Aperture approximating half the length of the entire shell. Body sharply rounded at the periphery, abruptly constricted into the short, broad neck. Whorls of conch about 4, those of the spire flattened laterally and increasing rapidly in diameter; sutures distinct, slightly impressed. Protoconch rather large relatively, smooth and highly polished, including about 3 volutions; initial turn minute, flattened behind; succeeding whorls increasing more rapidly in diameter than in altitude, broadly inflated except for the last quarter turn. Opening of conch indicated by the lower luster and increased flattening of the whorl. Sculpture restricted to the half

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

507

dozen well formed, moderately elevated, subequal, regularly spaced spirals which gird the extreme base of the body and the pillar and an equal number of fine, closely crowded lirae upon the anterior fascicle. Aperture rather narrow, angulated behind. Outer lip broadly emarginate at the siphonal fascicle, flaring in front of the fascicle, thin-edged but somewhat thickened behind the margin; outer limit of the obscure varix defined by a slight depression. Inner wall of aperture sharply constricted along the base of the body. Parietal wash thin. Pillar glaze a little heavier and finely denticulate. Pillar bearing a feeble marginal fold outlined by a shallow linear groove. Anterior canal short, not very broad; emarginate at the extremity.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 5.0 millimeters; length of aperture, 2.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.5 millimeters. . Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371865.
Type locality. No. 3419, McClelland farm, west bank of Chipola River, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.
Except M. oryzoides and M. sima, Mitrella Wastos is the most common of the smaller Columbellopsis, Mitrella sima is similar in general dimensions and outline but is more tapering, and recurved anteriorly.
The varix and rather sharp curvature at the periphery give to Mitrella blastos a Strombina-like aspect not shared by any other Chipola species of the section except Mitrella belonis which like M. oxia is larger and more slender than M. blastos.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213^, 2564P, 3419P.

the anterior a little shorter but more elevated than those behind it and marking the entrance to the anterior canal. Inner margin of aperture obliquely constricted at the base of the body. Parietal and pillar wash rather thin except for a small drop of callus directly in front of the commissure and for a series of small denticles on the pillar, corresponding roughly to the spirals. Anterior canal short, broad, recurved. Terminal notch broad, symmetrical, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 7.2 millimeters; length of aperture, 3.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371835. Topotype: Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Mitrella oxia is shorter and relatively stouter than M. asema, and the whorls of the conch are not so flattened laterally and usually fewer by one. The outline and general dimensions of the conch of M. oxia suggest those of Mitrella trajectionis (Maury) but the whorls of the former are lower and more rounded. The protoconch of M. trajectionis is obtuse and includes only 2 volutions, the initial turn well rounded and immersed only at the tip, while that of M. oxia is acute and contains about 4 volutions, the initial turn very small and largely submerged in the succeeding whorl. Mitrella phagon, the common Oak Grove analog, is larger and relatively stouter. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r ; Aidrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.

Mitrella oxia Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 18
Shell small, rather slender, and polished. Aperture about half as high as the shell. Whorls of spire very feebly constricted at the sutures, the body smoothly contracted into the rather broad neck; whorls of conch 5, sharp-edged behind, separated by rather feebly impressed sutures. Protoconch relatively rather large, slender, obtusely tapering; nuclear volutions probably 4, the initial turn partly immersed, the succeeding volutions increasing in diameter and height with a moderate degree of rapidity but decreasing in convexity ; close of nucleus indicated by a slight break in the shell, the flattening of the whorl, and the lower polish. Spiral sculpture restricted to about 8 lirations on the base of the body and the pillar, less crowded and more elevated anteriorly, and 4 or 5 equal, linearly spaced threadlets on the anterior fascicle. Aperture narrow, angulated behind. Outer lip feebly emarginate posteriorly, flaring slightly in front, varicated a little behind the margin and produced backward upon the preceding volution. Inner surface of labrum threaded with 6 or 7 rather fine, equal, and equispaced lirations,
695462 47 2

Mitrella phagon Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 2
Shell small, highly polished, elongate-conic. Aperture less than half as high as the entire shell. Body obtusely angulated at the periphery, flattened behind, rather sharply constricted in front into the broad neck. Whorls of spire trapezoidal, very narrowly tabulated posteriorly, increasing in diameter with moderate rapidity; whorls of conch 5, closely appressed and separated by sharply defined sutures. Protoconch smooth, rather large relatively, including 4 volutions; initial turn flattened behind, almost entirely immersed; second whorl also low; third and fourth volutions increasing rapidly both in height and diameter. Dividing line between conch and protoconch irregular; opening of conch indicated by a slight change in the texture of the shell and by the increased flattening of the whorl. Axial sculpture not developed, though traces of an axial color pattern of rather crowded, somewhat sinuous and irregular, brownish lines are still retained. Spiral sculpture restricted to about a dozen lirations that gird the extreme base of the body and pillar, becoming increasingly narrower, more rounded, and more closely

508 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

spaced anteriorly and merging gradually into the crowded threadlets of the anterior fascicle. Aperture rather narrow, sinuous, acutely angulated behind. Outer lip feebly constricted directly in front of the commissure, slightly flaring toward the base, sharply rounded at the entrance to the canal. Terminal varix ill-defined, produced backward upon the preceding turn; inner surface lirate except at the siphonal fasciole; lirae usually 5 or 6, most elevated posteriorly, regularly spaced, the feeble anterior liration defining the entrance to the anterior canal. Inner margin of aperture sharply concave. Parietal wash rather thin except for a gob of callus directly in front of the commissure. Pillar short, reinforced, a series of short, irregular denticles developed just within the outer margin of the heavy glaze; inner margin of pillar sharp. Anterior canal very short, broad, recurved. Terminal notch broad, U-shaped, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 8.3 millimeters; length of aperture, 3.7 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.8 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat Mus. No. 371836. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow Eiver, Okaloosa County, Fla. Mitrella phagon is the probable analog in the Oak Grove fauna of M. oseia in the Chipola. The Oak Grove species is larger, and relatively stouter than that from the Chipola; the body is more angular and the anterior part of the shell less tapering. Mitrella phagon is fairly common at the single horizon from which it has been collected. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646C, 5632P, 5631r, 5633r, 7054P, 10659*.
Mitrella trajectionis (Maiiry)
Plate LII, figure 3
1910. Astyris trajectionis Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 23, pi. 6, fig. 1.
Shell small, smooth and shining, seven-whorled; spiral sculpture consisting only of about ten impressed lines at the base of the shell; outer lip thickened near the margin so as to form a slight varix and with about half a dozen denticulate lirae within ; columella with a moderate callus. Length of shell 6; greatest width 2.5 millimeters.
Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Florida. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
Figured topotype?. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371864. The shell is slender, fusiform, the maximum diameter falling a little in front of the median line. The body is sharply rounded at the periphery. The whorls of the spire are flattened, rather sharp-edged posteriorly and separated by rather deeply impressed sutures. Five of the seven whorls are included in the conch, and two in the smooth, highly polished protoconch. The initial turn of the protoconch is well-rounded and immersed at the tip, the succeeding volution inflated at its beginning but becoming increasingly flattened toward its

close. The dividing line between the conch and protoconch is sharply defined. The aperture is rather narrow and angulated posteriorly. There is an obscure emargination at the posterior fasciole. The inner wall of the aperture is obliquely contracted at the base of the body. The pillar is moderately long for the group and bears an obtuse marginal fold delimited by a shallow groove. The terminal notch is broad and very shallow and obliquely directed.
The height of the figured topotype is 6.4 millimeters; the maximum diameter, 2.5 millimeters.
Mitrella trajectionis (Maury) is similar in the characters of the conch to M. oaeia. The protoconch of o®ia, however, contains twice as many turns as that of G. trajectionis and tapers more acutely because of the more minute initial turn. The conchal whorls of M. trajectionis are relatively high and flattened laterally.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities ?7893r, ?2213r, 3419P; Cornell University collection.
Mitrella alumen Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 5
Shell moderately large for the group, elongate-conic. Aperture a little less than half as high as the entire shell. Whorls of spire flattened laterally, sharp-edged behind, increasing in diameter with a fair degree of rapidity. Body smoothly rounding at the base into the broad neck. Whorls of conch 5, separated by impressed sutures. Protoconch rather small, obtuse, including 3 complete volutions, the initial turn somewhat inflated, immersed at the tip, the two succeeding turns gradually increasing in altitude and diameter but decreasing in convexity. Close of nucleus indicated by a slight break in the shell and the lower luster and greater flattening of the postnuclear whorls. Sculpture reduced to the 4 or 5 spiral lirations that gird the pillar and an equal number of finer, more crowded threadlets upon the anterior fasciole. Aperture narrow, slightly oblique, angulated behind. Outer lip feebly emarginate directly in front of the commissure, flaring slightly toward the base. Terminal varix reduced to an obscure axial fold a little behind the margin, slightly produced posteriorly upon the preceding volution; inner surface lirate except at the posterior fasciole; lirae usually 7 in number, the 2 posterior and the anterior, which defines the entrance to the canal, the most prominent. Labium excavated at the base of the body. Pillar straight and moderately long. Parietal and pillar wash rather thin, heaviest directly in front of the commissure and along the pillar; a few irregular denticles developed on the pillar corresponding in position to the spirals. Canal short, not very broad. Terminal notch U-shaped, rather narrow, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 10.1 millimeters; length of aperture, 4.2 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.2 millimeters.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIAJ AND SCAPHOPODA

509

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114218.1 Type locality: No. 2211, Lower bed at Alum Bluff, Apalachicola Kiver, Liberty Co., Fla. Mitrella alumen is apparently the analog on the Apalachicola Kiver of asema on the Chipola Kiver. As in so many of the analogous species, the Alum Bluff form is ruder, the whorls are less numerous by one, and the spirals upon the pillar are fewer and coarser. Mitrella alumen has not been recognized except from the type locality. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211?.

Mitrella dallina Gardner, n. sp.

Plate LII, figure 4

,

Shell very small and very slender, elongate-conic. Aperture less than half as high as the entire shell. Body whorl abruptly constricted at the base, flattened behind the periphery and forming with the whorls of the spire a very smooth and slender obelisk. Whorls of conch probably between 6 and 7 in number, separated by distinct but not conspicuous linear sutures. Protoconch slightly decorticated, apparently rather small, subacute and including about 3 volutions. Initial turn minute, largely immersed in the succeeding turn; remaining whorls increasing more rapidly in diameter than in height, broadly rounded except near the close of the nuclear whorls. Dividing line between the conch and protoconch obscure. Spiral sculpture restricted to 5 to 7 rather strong, well rounded cords that gird the extreme base of the body and the pillar and to 3 to 5 finer lirations that crowd the anterior fascicle. Aperture narrow, acutely angulated behind. Outer lip obscurely emarginate at the posterior fascicle, feebly arcuate, thin-edged, reinforced by a rather broad, axial fold developed a little behind the outer margin and slightly produced posteriorly upon the preceding whorl; denticulations on the inner surface feeble, subequal and equispaced from the siphonal notch to the entrance to the anterior canal. Inner margin of aperture sharply constricted at the base of the body. Parietal wash very thin. Pillar moderately long, rather heavily glazed, feebly rugose. Inner margin of pillar obscurely plicate. Anterior canal rather long for the group, well differentiated, recurved. Terminal notch broad, not very deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 6.0 millimeters; length of aperture, 2.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.3 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371837. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Mitrella dallina is a slender miniature of M. dalli (Maury). It is only about half as large as Miss Maury's species, and the whorls are a little less flattened. M. belonis, a coexistent species of comparable dimensions, also has a more flattened, acutely tapering

spire, and the posterior margin of the whorls is elevated on the final half turn into an ill-defined fold, which, with the relatively large body, lends a Stromfrma-like outline to the shell.
The type of M. dallina is unique. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.
Mitrella asema Gardner,* n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 6
Shell of moderate dimensions for the genus, the spire elevated and acutely tapering. Aperture decidedly less than half as high as the entire shell. Whorls of conch 6, those of the spire flattened, regularly increasing in diameter, sharp-edged posteriorly. Body broadly rounded. Suture lines distinct, impressed. Protoconch smooth, highly polished, rather small and slender; initial turn immersed'at the tip; second and third whorls increasing in diameter and altitude with moderate rapidity but decreasing in inflation. Close of nucleus indicated by a slight thickening of the shell and a somewhat irregular break, followed by the dullfinished, flattened, post-nuclear whorls. Incrementals microscopically fine. Spirals restricted to half a dozen low, rather obscure lirations upon the extreme base of the body and the pillar, more sharply defined and least crowded anteriorly; and to an approximately equal number of fine, equisized, linearly spaced lirations upon the -wide anterior fascicle. Aperture narrow, oblique, acutely angulated posteriorly. Outer lip sinuous, feebly constricted directly in front of the commissure and flaring slightly at the periphery of the body, rather sharply folded and slightly thickened a little behind the margin, 6 to 9 subequal and equispaced lirae within. Inner wall of aperture sharply contracted at the base of the body. Pillar rather long for the group and straight. Parietal wall and pillar smoothly glazed, not denticulate or rugose; inner margin of pillar rounded. Anterior canal short, rather broad. Terminal notch broad, moderately deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 11.0 millimeters; length of aperture, 4.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371834. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Mitrella asema is shorter and stouter and less attenuated anteriorly than M. dalli (Maury) and includes fewer volutions. The whorls are more flattened laterally and more regularly tapering than those of Mitrella oacia. Mitrella alumen from the lower bed at Alum Bluff is apparently a close analog of M. asema, but it is coarser and not so slender. The protoconch and the character of the early whorls of M: asema suggest Mitrella ischna, but the posterior tabulation is less

510 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

distinct, and there is no trace in M. asema of any spiral sculpture except that on the pillar and fasciole.
The species is rather rare even at the single locality at which it is represented.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.

Mitrella dalli (Maury)

*

1910. Astyris Dalli Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No.

21, p. 23, pi. 6, fig. 2.

Shell very slender, smooth, acute, nine-whorled, the two

nuclear whorls being very smooth and shining; spiral sculp-

ture consisting only of about ten to fifteen impressed lines at

the base of the shell; transverse sculpture limited to a varix-

like thickening near the edge of the outer lip; margin of outer

lip sinuous, with nine or ten denticulate lirae within; columella

with a slight callus. Length of shell 12; greatest width 4

millimeters.

Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Fla.

Cornell University collection.

Named in honor of Dr. Dall of the Smithsonian. Maury,

1910.

The length of the aperture is less than half that of the shell, and the body is smoothly constricted into the moderately long, straight pillar. The whorls of the adult conch run as high as 8 in number. The initial protoconchal turn is minute and immersed at the tip, the remaining whorls of the protoconch increasingly elevated and decreasingly inflated. The dividing line between the nuclear and postnuclear whorls is welldefined and is indicated by a slight break in the shell and by the lower polish of the conch. The posterior edges of the whorls of the conch are sharp and the sutures distinct and impressed. The aperture is rather narrow and rudely lobate, the anterior canal of moderate length for the group, not very wide, and broadly emarginate at the extremity. Both M. asema from the Chipola River and M. alumen from Alum Bluff, species of comparable dimensions, are stouter relatively and include fewer volutions. Mitrella dallina, a coexistent form of slender outline and many whorls, is only about half as high as M. dalli and has a relatively short body.
Mitrella dalli is not uncommon at the single locality from which it has been collected.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213p, Cornell University collection.

Section TETEASTOMELLA Bellardi in Sacco
1890. Tetrastomella Bellardi in Sacco, R. accad. Scienze di Torino Mem., vol. 40, pp. 323, 333.
1890. Tetrastomella Bellardi in Sacco, Molluschi dei terreni terziarii del Piemonte e della Liguria, pt. 6, p. 41.
Type herewith designated: Mure® subulatus Brocchi. Plaisancian of northern Italy.
The subgenus is reserved for relatively large shells of the Mitrella group which have in common an elevated, polygyrate spire, the later whorls compressed and narrowly tabulated posteriorly, the body obtusely

angulated at the base and constricted into a broad neck of moderate length. The nucleus is similar to that of Mitrella s. s. The shell is typically smooth except for the incremental striae and the lirae which gird the pillar and the anterior fasciole. The outer lip is obscurely emarginate at the anal fasciole, varicose and lirate within. At the base it is abruptly constricted into the rather short, recurved canal. The inner margin of the aperture is excavated and heavily callused, the margin of the callus sharp and standing apart from the pillar wall. The pillar rugae are inconspicuous and correspond roughly in position to the spiral lirae. The anterior fasciole is short and slightly bulging. The margin of the rather shallow, asymmetric, terminal notch is bent back a little, giving to the anterior canal a nasute appearance.
Tetrastomella differs from Columbellopsis and Mitrella s. s. in the more angular outline and narrowly tabulated later whorls. The American representatives of Tetrastomella are larger than any of the other members of the Mitrella group. The species ischna and the subspecies mitrodita differ from Tetrastomella in the development of a more or less fortuitous spiral sculpture, a decided nick at the base of the outer lip, and a narrower and deeper terminal notch, but they differ from the other described superspecific groups in even more important characters. The resemblance of Tetrastomella perfervida of the lower Miocene Floridian fauna to the subgenotype from the Italian Pliocene is rather striking.
Mitrella perfervida (Dall)
Plate LII, figure 1
1900. Astyris perfervida Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 5, p. 1197, pi. 41, fig. 10. (No description.)
Shell of average dimensions for the group. Spire elevated, multigyrate, the earlier volutions evenly tapering, increasing slowly in diameter, the later turns increasing more rapidly and sharply but narrowly tabulated posteriorly. Body whorl abruptly constricted into the short pillar. Anterior canal short but well defined. Length of aperture less than half that of the shell. Whorls of conch numerous, separated by impressed suture lines. Protoconch smooth, highly polished, slender, subacute, performing 3% volutions; initial turn minute, slightly tilted, immersed at the tip; succeeding volutions increasing gradually, in diameter and decreasing in convexity, the final half turn with a lateral flattening similar to that of the early whorls of the conch. Dividing line between protoconch and conch obscure, indicated only by an irregular break in the shell. Sculpture of conch restricted to 6 or 8 low, flattened cords on the base of the body and pillar, which become increasingly crowded and elevated anteriorly and pass without any sharp break into the'

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

511

half dozen crowded lirae on the anterior fasciole. Aperture narrow, angular, silicate at the commissure. Outer lip thickened externally and slightly produced posteriorly; inner surface sharply lirate medially and anteriorly, the lirae along the medial portion of the latorum more prominent than those in front of them; constriction at the entrance to the canal subangular. LaMum obliquely excavated at the base of the body. Parietal wash heaviest directly in front of the commissure and on the pillar, rather thin along the body wall. Pillar obscurely denticulate in harmony with the spirals. Anterior canal short but clearly denned, with parallel, proximate margins; terminal notch broadly U-shaped, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of incomplete holotype: Height, 18.6 millimeters; length of aperture, 8.6 millimeters; maxim-am diameter, 7.3 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 6.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 107387. Type locality: Sta. 2646, Oak Grove, Okalo'osa County, Fla,. The specimens from Alum Bluff run a little stouter than those from Oak Grove, and the spirals on the pillar are, as a rule, fewer in number and more prominent. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211C ; Oak Grove sand, localities 2646»,? 5631r, 7054C.
MitreUa perfervida megala Gardner, n. subsp.
Plate LII, figure 21
Shell large and heavy, the aperture about half as high as the entire shell. Apex broken away so that the exact number of whorls is not determinate but possibly about 9 in the conch. Whorls of spire trapezoidal, flattened laterally, somewhat turreted on the medial and anterior portions owing to the narrow posterior tabulation, which becomes less and less narrow toward the aperture. Body compressed and abruptly constricted into the broad pillar. Suture lines distinct, impressed. Protoconch not preserved. Sculpture restricted to a few obscure groovings on the base of the body, 6 to 8 rather prominent lirae on the pillar, and half a dozen lower and more closely spaced lirae on the anterior fasciole. Aperture subquadrate, acutely angulated and sulcated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip slightly produced posteriorly, approximately parallel to the axis as far as the base of the body, where it is abruptly constricted to form the walls of the narrow canal. Labral varix obscurely denned. Lirations on the inner surface rather coarse and irregular, most prominent on the posterior medial portion. Labium sharply excavated at the base of the body. Pillar moderately long and broad. Parietal wash heavy directly in front of the commissure but rather thin elsewhere; pillar glazed, denticulate, the denticles small and obtuse and corresponding in position to the spirals. An-

terior canal short, broad, recurved, the margins subparallel. Terminal notch broad, moderately deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 22.8 millimeters; length of aperture, 11.0 millimeters; maximum diameter, 10.8-millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 9.5 millimeters.
Holotype: TJ. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371881. Type locality: No. 2564, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Mitrella (Tctrastomella) perfervida megala/ suggests a large M. perfervida (Dall). The subspecies is relatively broader, the tabulation on the later whorls is not so narrow as in perfervida, the body is more angular, and the spirals on the pillar are more prominent and more numerous. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2564% 3419r.
Mitrella ischna Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 7
Shell rather high and very slender. Aperture less than half as long as the entire shell. Whorls 7^ in the conch, those of the spire trapezoidal, increasing slowly in diameter; the later volutions minutely tabulated posteriorly. Body whorl smoothly but rather abruptly constricted at the base. Suture lines distinct but not impressed. Protoconch small, smooth, highly polished, subacutely tapering, coiled 3 times; initial turn minute, immersed at the tip; two remaining volutions increasing slowly in height and diameter but decreasing in convexity. Dividing line between conch and protoconch indicated by a slight break in the texture of the shell; spire in the young forms and in some of the adults entirely smooth; in other adults, as in the type, lineated on the anterior half of the conch by two subequal, obscure grooves, the anterior a little in front of the median horizontal, the posterior midway between the anterior sulcus and the suture line; base of body and pillar girded with about half a dozen unequal cords, those on the pillar the most prominent and the most distantly spaced. Anterior fasciole closely threaded with half a dozen lower, more crowded lirations. Aperture narrow, obliquely lobate, acutely angulated posteriorly. Outer lip varicated a little behind the thin, sharp margin, pushed backward a little, on the preceding turn; inner surface of varix set with 9 or 10 short, lirate ridges, subequispaced, but slightly more elevated medially; labral margin notched at the base of the body of the adult, possibly for the extension of the eye stalks. Inner wall of aperture' strongly concave. Parietal wash heavy directly in front of the commissure but thin on the base of the body. Pillar thickly glazed, obscurely denticulated; margin of pillar well rounded, Anterior canal short, recurved, narrowly and deeply emarginate.

512 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Dimensions of holotype: Height, 15.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 6.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 5.6 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 5.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U.S. Nat. Mus. No. 371832. Type locality: Sta. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla. The members of the species in which the spiral sculpture is prominent have been segregated under the subspecies mitrodita. The nick near the base of the labrum is not always perceptible, but it is much too commonly developed and too uniform in its character to be a pathologic phenomenon. The smooth individuals suggest M. perfervida and M. dalli in the elevated multispiral conch. M. perfervida is a little larger and stouter, and the tabulation of the later whorls is well-defined; M. dalli, on the other hand, is smaller than M. ischna, more slender, and less abruptly constricted at the base of the body. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213C, 2564P, 3419P.

of the commissure and dense along the pillar, the margin of the glaze sharply defined and standing apart a little from the pillar wall. Anterior canal short, recurved. Terminal notch narrow, deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 16.0 millimeters; length of aperture, 7.0 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6.3 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 5.7 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371833. Type locality: No. 7151, Tenmile Creek, Calhoun County, Fla. M. ischna mitrodita is readily separated from M. ischna s.s. as well as from all other coexistent members of the genus by the development of a spiral sculpture. The type is a peripheral member, however; the spiral sculpture in most of the individuals is more restricted and less prominent, and the labral notch may be wanting. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213?, 2564P, 3419r, 7151?.

Mitrella ischna mitrodita Gardner, n. subsp.
Plate LII, figure 8
Shell rather small, solid, elevated. Aperture less than half the height of the entire shell. Whorls of conch 7 in the type, those of the spire trapezoidal; the later volutions narrowly tabulated; the body whorl smoothly constricted at the base. Suture lines distinct but not impressed. Protoconch small, smooth, highly polished, obtusely tapering, including 3 volutions; initial turn minute, immersed at the tip; two succeeding whorls increasing slowly in diameter and height but decreasing in convexity. Line between conch and protoconch broken, indicated chiefly by a slight change in the texture of the shell. Later adult whorls spirally lirate in the type; spirals initiated on the fourth turn of the conch in the form of two feeble grooves similar to those on the body and the final whorl of the spire of M. ischna s.s.; sculpture on the later volutions elevated rather than depressed, the two initial sulci deepening so that the area between the grooves and that between the posterior groove and the posterior suture stand up as heavy cords; other grooves and cords developed in the same manner, so that on the penultima of the type, there are 3 and on the body 4 subequal cords, with 1 or 2 linear grooves in front of them; anterior medial portion of the body girded with an unsculptured band about double the width of one of the spirals; base of body and pillar coarsely lirate. Fasciole feebly threaded. Aperture narrow, obliquely lobate, acutely angulated posteriorly. Outer lip obscurely varicated a little behind the thin, sharp margin, lirate within. Edge of labrum emarginate, as a rule, at the periphery. Inner wall of aperture constricted along the base of the body. Pillar straight. Parietal wash heaviest directly in front

Genus STBOMBINA Morcli
1852. Stronibina Morcli, Catalogus Conchyllorum quae reliquit D. Alphonso d'Aguirra & Gadea, Comes de Yoldi, p. 85.
1901. Strombocolumbus Cossiimnn. Essais de paleoconchologie compared, vol. 4, p. 241.
Type by subsequent designation: Cossmann, Essais de paleoconchologie compare'e, pt. 4, p. 241, 1901: Columbella lanceolata Sowerby = Columbella recurva Sowerby. Recent on the Pacific side of Panama.
Bronn in 1849s used Strombina as a major group name to include Chenopus, Rostellaria, Pteroceras, Strombus, and Pterodonta. The name did not have nor was it intended to have a generic significance, and it has no generic standing. Nevertheless, Bucquoy, Dautzenberg, and Dollfus substituted the name Columbellopsis for Strombina, on the ground that Strombina was already preoccupied by Bronn,' but included under it a number of other forms of the genus Atilia H. and A. Adams 1853, typified by Mitrella minor Scacchi. Cossmann considered the Columbellopsis of Bucquoy, Dautzenberg, and Dollfus as an exact synonym of Atilia and for that reason no longer available for the group of C. lanceolata Sowerby. Assuming, as did the authors of Les Mollusqnes marins du Roussillon, that Strombina had been preoccupied by Bronn, he substituted for Stronibina the name Strombocolumbus.
Woodring in 1928 observed that Strombina was probably susceptible to division. None of the east American Tertiary species exhibit the noded sculpture that characterizes the genotype.
Strombina as it is commonly used for the east coast shells includes those species characterized by an ele-
8 Bronn, H. G., Index palaeoutologicus, vol. 3, p. 440, 1849.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

513

vated, commonly turreted spire, a heavily varicose outer lip, in some species, as in the 8. gradata group, a tricornute cross section of the body due to a flattening of the apertural face, an oblique compression behind the labral varix, a sculpture which, if present, is usually axial and inclined to evanesce toward the aperture and a canal more sharply constricted than that of the genotype.
The group is best developed toward the close of Alum Bluff time, in the Shoal Eiver, the period during which the fauna was apparently most freely in communication with the faunas of the mid-Americas.
The species has been reported from the Tertiaries of

Europe and the Antillean and Floridian region, but the Eecent representatives are confined to the warm waters of the Pacific side of Middle and South America.
There are six species reported from the Alum Bluff, three of them allied to the Strombina, gradata (Guppy) group from the mid-Americas, though smaller and more delicate. The genus occurs very much more abundantly in the Shoal Eiver than in either of the other horizons^ for not only is 8trombina waltonia much more prolific than either 8. aldrichi from the Chipola or the subspecies nemoralis from the Oak Grove, but the three smaller unsculptured species of 8trombina are all of them restricted to the Shoal Kiver horizon.

Axial sculpture restricted to the last 4 or 5 whorls, pillar smooth ........................... StromMna waltonia Gardner, n. sp. Axial sculpture restricted to the last 1, 2, or 3 whorls, pillar denticulate ..................... .StromMna aldrichi (Maury) s. 1.
Altitude of adult usually exceeding 12.0 millimeters..................................... .StromMna aldrichi (Maury) s. s. t Altitude of adult rarely exceeding 12.0 millimeters. .. \............................. .StromMna aldrichi nemoralis (Maury) Axial sculpture restricted to incremental striae and the labral varix: Inner margin of pillar rounded or subacute:
Spire not very slender either in absolute dimensions or relative to the diameter of the body ..........................= StromMna lissa Gardner, n. sp.
Spire very slender both in absolute dimensions and relative to the diameter of the body............................. StromMna lampra Gardner, n. sp.
Inner margin of pillar acutely keeled.................................................. .StromMna ceryx Gardner, n. sp.

StromMna waltonia Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figures 26-28
Shell rather thick, crumbly, tall for the genus but very slender, the spire even more slender relatively than the body and acutely tapering. Whorls 12 to 14 in all, the early volutions flattened laterally and increasing gradually in diameter, commonly flattened on the apertural face and the later turns narrowly tabulated. Body so compressed behind the terminal varix that it appears somewhat distorted; gently constricted at the base into the rather broad, recurved pillar. Suture lines distinct, feebly impressed. Protoconch small, slender, subacute, smooth, and rather highly polished; component volutions 3; initial turn minutely bulbous, immersed in the succeeding turn; two remaining turns feebly inflated. Dividing line between conch and protoconch indicated by a slight change in the texture of the shell and by the flattening of the whorls. On the posterior half of the later volutions, an axial sculpture of sharp little puckers normally equal, and equispaced, running about 16 to the whorl except on the body, where they are irregular, and on the last half turn, where they may be obsolete; incremental striae microscopically fine. Spiral sculpture restricted to a coarse irregular cording on the extreme base of the body and the pillar and to an obscure striation on the anterior fascicle. Aperture narrow, sinuous, channeled posteriorly. Outer lip thinedged but varicose behind the margin and pushed backward on the preceding whorl; commonly a slight depression directly behind the varix. Lirations on the

inner surface of the varix short, 9 in the type, decreasing in elevation anteriorly, the posterior liration usually opposite the extremity of the posterior of the pillar spirals. Inner margin of aperture sinuous. Parietal wall and pillar rather heavily glazed, the pillar callus commonly standing apart a little from the body wall, not plicate nor denticulate. Inner margin of pillar well rounded. Anterior canal rather narrow, short, twisted, flaring a little and deeply and obliquely emarginate at the anterior extremity.
Dimensions of incomplete holotype: Height, 23 millimeters; length of aperture, 12.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 8.5 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 6.7 millimeters. Dimensions of immature paratype: Height, 14.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.7. millimeters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371848.
Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Eiver, Walton County, Fla.
Strombina waltonia is more elevated and more slender than 8. aldrichi (Maury), the later volutions are more turreted and the body larger, relative to the size of the spire. The axials are also more numerous by 2 or 3 to the whorl and are developed on the later 4 or 5 volutions instead of being restricted to the body and the latest whorl of ther spire.
StromMna waltonia is the Floridian representative of a group widely distributed in the mid-Americas. The species share the diagnostic characters of an elevated turreted spire, a body obliquely flattened behind the terminal varix and presenting a more or less ob-

514 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

scure tricornute cross section and a sculpture of short, pinched axials confined in many species to the posterior part of the whorl. Among the species are Strombina gradata (Guppy), 1866, described presumably from the Bowden beds of Jamaica, 8. cyphonotus Pilsbry and Johnson, 1911, and 8. prisma Pilsbry and Johnson, 1911, both from the Dominican Republic, Strombina lessepsiana Brown and Pilsbry, 1911, from the Gatun of the Canal Zone and Costa Rica, and Strombina gradata humboldti Rutsch from the Punta Gavilan beds in northern Venezuela. Strombina dorsata Sowerby from the Recent Panamanian fauna on the Pacific side has much the general aspect of the group although no trace remains of the axial sculpture.
Occurrence : Shoal River formation, localities, 3856a, 2645r, 3732P, 3742a, 3731r, 5080?, 5184C, 3748r, 9960r.
Strombina aldrichi (Maury)
Plate LII, figure 29
1910. Astyris Aldrichi Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 24, pi. 6, fig. 3.
Shell of moderate size, polished, with the general shape of A. perfervida Dall, but characterized by the presence of ten or more vertical riblets on the body whorl just below the suture. Earlier whorls eroded, remaining whorls five, outer lip with about eight lirae within and a slight external varix near the margin, canal refiexed ; coluinella with five weak denticles and a moderate callus on the anterior part. Length of decollate shell 14 [millimeters] ; greatest width 6 millimeters.
Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Fla. Cornell University collection. Dedicated to Mr. T. H. Aldrich of Washington. Maury, 1910.
- Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 16.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 5.7 millimeters.
Figured specimen : U.S. Nat. Mus. No. 371883, from No. 3419, Baileys Perry, Chipola River, Fla.
The shell is rather small for the group and not very thick. The aperture is less than half as high as the entire shell, and the spire correspondingly elevated and acutely tapping. The earlier volutions increase more slowly in diameter, however, than the later and are not so sharp-edged posteriorly. There are as many as 9 whorls in the adult conch, while the protoconch includes 3 volutions, the earliest partially submerged, the 2 later turns feebly inflated. The dividing line between the conch and protoconch is clearly marked by a slight break in the shell and by the flattening of the whorl. The axial riblets are sharp little puckers, restricted entirely to the posterior half of the whorl and commonly obsolete on the final half turn; usually as many as 14 if developed around the entire circumference of the whorl, sometimes restricted to the body and more rarely developed on the final whorls of the spire. The spirals at the base of the body and on the pillar are remarkably strong and sharp. The aperture is narrow and acutely angulated at the posterior commissure. The prominence of the denticles on the inner surface

of the labrum opposite the constriction at the base of the body make the aperture look almost as narrow behind as in front. The terminal notch is broadly Ushaped and obliquely directed.
Strombina aldrichi in the broad sense is readily isolated from 8. waltoma by its smaller size, relatively stouter outline, rather less numerous whorls, less uniformly tapering spire but relatively more slender body, more restricted and less numerous axials, and denticulate pillar.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213P, 3419r, Cornell University collection.
Strombina aldrichi nemoratis (Maury)
Plate LII, figure 30
1903. Strombina tetrica Dall, Wagner F*ree Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 6, p. 1590 (name only).
1910. Astyris aldrichi var. nemoralis Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 24, pi. 6, fig. 4.
Shell resembling the typical form from Bailey's Ferry but smaller, and with riblets on the next to the last as well as on the last whorl. Earlier whorls eroded, remaining whorls three; spiral sculpture of a varying number of impressed lines extending from the base of the shell to about midway or less up on the body whorl; transverse sculpture of (on the last whorl ten to eleven) narrow, nearly straight, rounded riblets best developed at and near the sutures and becoming obsolete a short distance below them. These riblets are present only on the last whorl and a half and do not appear on the earlier whorls. Outer lip with a varix near the margin and with about eight sharply-cut lirae within; aperture narrow; canal refiexed; columella with about six denticles and a thin callus. Length of decollate shell 10; greatest width 5 mm.
Oak Grove, Fla. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
Dimensions of topotype: Height, 12.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.6 millimeters.
Topotype: U.S. Nat. Mus. No. 371868. From No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.
Topotype: Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.
The subspecies is consistently smaller and usually a little stouter than the species s.s., although like it there are 9 whorls included in the adult conch. The protoconch judged by the small scar is probably similar to that of aldrichi s.s. The axial sculpture offers approximately the same range of variation in number of ribs and degree of development as that of the species s.s., but the spiral sculpture is sharper relatively, and fortuitous linear grooves occasionally occur well up upon the body and even on the whorls of the spire.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646», 5632r ; Cornell University Collection.
Strombina lissa Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figures 14, 15
Shell small for the genus, stout, conical, acutely tapering. Aperture nearly half as high as the entire

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

515

shell. Volutions 11 in all, only 6 of these included in

the conch. Whorls of spire trapezoidal, increasing

rather rapidly in diameter, very narrowly but sharply

tabulated behind. Body whorl rather smoothly con-

stricted into the short, broad pillar. Sutures distinct,

impressed. Protoconch large for the genus, smooth,

highly polished when perfectly preserved, somewhat

pupiform; initial turn flattened, almost entirely im-

mersed in the succeeding volution; 4 remaining volu-

tions increasing rather slowly in diameter and height

but decreasing in convexity so that the final half or

three-quarters turn is separable from the compressed

initial turn of the conch only by a very slight and

irregular break and an almost imperceptible change of

texture. Sculpture restricted to a few, shallow grooves

or flattened cords on the extreme base of the body, the

pillar and the short anterior fasciole. Aperture narrow,

angulated and feebly sulcate behind; outer lip beveled

to a thin, sharp margin, feebly varicose, slightly pro-

duced posteriorly on the preceding turn; inner varical

surface sharply lirate. Inner wall of aperture sharply

constricted at the base of the body. Pillar rather short

and straight, well-rounded at the margin; parietal

wash heavy, a gob of callus deposited on the parietal

wall directly in front of the commissure and irregular

denticles along the heavy pillar glaze. Anterior canal

short. Terminal notch narrow, deep, obliquely directed.

Dimensions of holotype: Height, 10.8 millimeters;

length of aperture, 5 millimeters; maximum diameter,

5 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum

diameter, 4.7 millimeters.

Holotype and juvenile paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus.

No. 371869.

,

Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River,

Walton County, Fla.

StromMna lissa, though by no means so abundant

nor so widely distributed as the much taller, axially

sculptured, coexistent 8. iDaltomay is very common at

the type locality and fairly well represented at other

Shoal River outcrops. 8. lampra from the environs of

Laurel Hill is smaller, more slender, and more acutely

tapering. Strombina mira Ball from Gatun is a species

of comparable dimensions though a little smaller and

more slender. The spiral sculpture, furthermore, is

developed over the entire base of the body in front of

the periphery, the lirae numbering about twice as many

as those on the base and pillar of 8. lissa.

The species varies rather widely in relative dimen-

sions.

Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856C ,

3732r, 3742*, 5195r, 3748r, 9960r.

Strombina lampra Gardner, n. sp. Plate LII, figure 13
Shell small for the group, highly polished, acutely tapering. Aperture about half as high as the entire

shell. Spire slender, the body whorl relatively large, flattened behind the labrum, abruptly contracted at the base; later volutions narrowly tabulated, trapezoidal in lateral outline. Whorls 9 in all, but only 5 included in the conch. Sutures distinct, feebly impressed. Protoconch moderately tall but slender; initial turn minute, almost entirely immersed; 3 remaining nuclear whorls' moderately inflated, increasing gradually in diameter and height, flattening toward the close. Dividing line between conch and protoconch distinct; well-preserved specimens marked by an abrupt change from the white of the protoconch to the shining gray of the conch and by a further lateral flattening of the whorl. Axial sculpture restricted to microscopically fine incremental striae. Base of body and pillar girded with a few well-defined spiral threads, -the posterior flattened on their summits but becoming increasingly narrower and more elevated anteriorly and merging into the 5 or 6 spirals that crowd the anterior fasciole. Aperture narrow, slightly oblique, acutely angulated and obscurely sulcate posteriorly. Outer lip thickened and pushed backward, the margin, however, thin and sharp; lirations on the inner surface feeble, except the posterior ridge directly opposite the constriction at the base of the body. Labium strongly concave. Parietal wash heavy, especially in front of the commissure; outer margin of glaze sharply defined. Pillar smooth except for a series of minute denticles developed in some adults and corresponding in position to the spirals on the anterior fasciole; inner margin of pillar subacute. Anterior canal short. Terminal notch .broad, deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 8.7 millimeters; length of aperture, 4.4 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.0 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 3.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371849. Type locality: No. 5618, 3% miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, Walton County, Fla. Strombina lampra is the smallest member of the genus known to occur in the Shoal River and the most slender. Strombina lissa resembles it in absence of sculpture except on the base and pillar, but A. lissa is much less shining and has a stouter spire both in absolute dimensions and relative to the size of the body. 8. lampra is for the most part restricted to the environs of De Funiak Springs. Occurrence*: Shoal River formation, localities 5079r, 9958r, 7264P, 5618», 9959P.
Strombina ceryx Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 16
Shell small for the genus, ovate-conic, fairly heavy and rude. Aperture about half as high as the entire shell. Whorls 6 to 7 in all, the earlier turns of the conch flattened laterally, the later volutions broadly

516 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

rounded, narrowly tabulated; the body abruptly constricted at the base. Suture lines impressed. Apex usually decorticated. Protoconch rather small, obtuse, probably including 3 volutions; initial turn minute and almost entirely immersed; second and third whorls broadly inflated, gradually flattening toward the close of the nucleus. Dividing line between conch and protoconch obscure, indicated by a slight and irregular break. Incremental striations feeble; other axial sculpture not developed. Spirals restricted to the base of the body, pillar arid anterior fascicle; base of the body commonly outlined by a faintly incised linear sulcus; 3 or 4 sharply elevated, narrow, uncrowded spirals developed between this sulcus and the anterior fascicle. Fascicle coarsely but obscurely lirate. Aperture broadly lenticular; acutely angulated and sulcated posteriorly but sulcus too shallow to cut off the terminal varix as it does in Bifurcium. Outer lip thickened slightly behind, and at the margin; feebly lirate within. Inner wall of aperture strongly concave, heavily glazed, the wash spread in a broad arc from the commissure to the canal, heaviest directly in front of the commissure; 2 or 3 obscure and irregular denticles occasionally developed on the base of the pillar. Pillar smooth except for these denticles and for the narrow but acute marginal fold. Anterior canal incipient; the entrance indicated by the anterior liration on the inner surface of the labrum and directly opposite, the marginal fold of the labium. Terminal notch narrow, deep, obliquely directed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 8.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 4.2 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.3 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371850. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. Strombina ceryx is the only member of the genus exhibiting the marginal keel and the strongly sulcated posterior commissure, which in a much exaggerated form characterize the subgenus Bifurcium,. Both of these diagnostic characters are too feebly developed in 8. ceryx to justify the reference of the species to Bifurcium. Furthermore, Bifurcium is a thinner shell and the varix is confined to the extreme margin of the lip; the lirae, characteristically well developed on the inner labral surface of Strombina are reduced in Bifurcium to feeble denticles developed only on the inner surface of the marginal varix; and the parietal wash in Strombina, including 8. ceryx., is thick; in Bifurcium it is very thin or absent. Strombina walli Mansfield (pi. LII, fig. 38) from the Brasso beds of Trinidad is a smaller, more delicate shell. The oral armature, though similar in a general way, is heavier and the gutter at the posterior commissure much better defined.

Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 3742P.
Family MUBICIDAE
Genus MUREX Linnaeus
1758. Murea; Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 746.
Type by subsequent designation (Montfort, Conchyliologie syste"matique, vol. 2, p. 619, 1810) : Murex pecten M.ontiovt=Murex tribulus Linnaeus. Recent in the South Pacific and Indian Oceans.
Shell oblong, oval, pyriform or fusiform in outline. Spire usually elevated, acutely tapering. Protoconch rather small, smooth, paucispiral. Ornamentation of conch elaborate; axial varices 3 in the restricted Murex, usually continuous, commonly spinose at the intersection with the spirals, less commonly foliaceous; simple costals may be reduced on the later whorls to peripheral tubercles; spiral sculpture developed, as a rule, over the entire conch, overriding the axials; primary spirals modified into spinose processes. Aperture subcircular, elliptical or ovate. Labrum varicated, lirate or denticulate within. Labium nonplicate, heavily glazed, often rugose or denticulate in front of the commissure and along the pillar. Anterior canal long and straight or short and recurved, generally roofed over in the adult.
Murex has a limited representation in the Cretaceous. In the succeeding Tertiary and later faunas the genus becomes increasingly abundant, and the recent species number well over 200, the most of them tropical and subtropical from between tides to a depth of 50 fathoms.
Seven species have been isolated from, the Alum Bluff, and the number would be materially increased if the imperfect specimens were named. Three out of the four species of Murex s.s. have been described from the Chipola. Though none has been named from the Oak Grove there are at least 3 species represented at that horizon, all of them allied to the Chipola forms. The single known Murex s.s. from the Shoal River is distinct. In the subgenus CMcoreus, M. folidodes from the Chipola is the close analog of M. aldrichi from the Shoal River. M, pyknos from the Shoal River is a form with no near relatives and of doubtful affinities. CMcoreus is not recorded in the Oak Grove.
The relationship of the Alum Bluff Murices to those from the Tampa silex beds is not so close as Ball supposed. The species are certainly allied, but the differences between the earlier and later representatives are constant and specific. The resemblance to the West Indian fauna is also strong, especially among the Murex s.s.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

517

Variees more or less spinose; anterior canal commonly very long, straight, and slender ........ ................... . Murex s. s. Axial varices only moderately elevated; primary spirals in front of the periphery on the body, not including the pillar, more than 8 in number: Shoulder defined both by the obscure angulation of the whorl and by the difference in character of the spiral sculpture; anterior canal conspicuously long and slender...................................... Mureae (Murese) chipolanus Dall. Shoulder little or not at all defined; spirals alternately fine and coarse from the anterior to the posterior suture; anterior canal moderately long and slender............................................ Murex (Murex) dasus Gardner, n. sp. Axial varices conspicuously elevated; primary spirals in front of the periphery on the body, not including the pillar, not more than 8 in number........................................................ Murex (Murex) nicholsi Gardner, n. sp.
Varices usually more or less foliaceous but not spinose; anterior canal not very long, rather broad, and recurved.............. Chicoreus Montfort.
Height of shell exceeding 40.0 mm.; varices foliaceous: Intervarical tubercles only 1 on the later whorls.......................... Murex (Chicoreus) folidodes Gardner, n. sp. Intervarical tubercles 2 on the later whorls. ...................... ........ Murex (Chicoreus) aldrichi Gardner, n. sp.
Height of shell not exceeding 40.0 mm.; varices simple, not conspicuous. ....... .Murex (Chicoreusl) pyknos Gardner, n. sp.

Subgenus MUREX s. s.
Type by subsequent designation (Montfort, Conchyliologie syste'matique, vol. 2, p. 619, 1810) : Murex pecten Montfort=lfwrea? tribtdus Linnaeus. Recent in the South Pacific and Indian Oceans.
The^subgenus is characterized by the rather short spire, the 3 axial varices either simple or spinose, and the long, straight, slender closed canal.
Murex (Murex) chipolanus Dall
Plate LIII, figures 1, 2
1890. Murex chrysostoma Gray var. chipolana Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 139.
The specimens from the Chipola River differ from the Recent M. chrysostoma in being smaller than the average adult Recent specimens, with a slightly shorter canal, from which the antecedent canal tends to divaricate, while in the typical chrysostoma it is usually continuous.
The anterior margin of the varices in the fossil also tends to be more spinose or to have the projecting points more produced than in the recent shell, though similarly situated and similar in number. Dall, 1890.
Shell rather small for the group and not very heavy. Spire moderately elevated, acutely tapering. Body, like the later whorls of the spire, inflated, rounding abruptly at the base into the slender pillar. Aperture including anterior canal approximately two-thirds as high as the entire shell. Whorls of adult conch 6 or 7, increasing regularly and rather rapidly in diameter, moderately convex, the maximum, convexity of the whorl falling near the median horizontal. Whorls closely appressed, separated by inconspicuous sutures feebly crenulated by the costals of the preceding whorl. Protoconch small, smooth, elevated, turbinate, including 4 volutions; initial turn bulbous, immersed at the tip; succeeding whorls feebly convex, turbinate; close of protoconch indicated by a narrow, arcuate riblet. Axial sculpture of 3 primary varices, including the terminal varix, spinose at the periphery of the later *whorls and the body, the spines slender, sickle-shaped, laminar, closely folded, one of the primary spirals forming the midrib, the free edges proximate and fac-

ing the aperture; spines not developed behind the periphery ; commonly secondary spines in front of the periphery at the intersection with the primary spirals, especially on the base of the body and the posterior portion of the pillar; primary varices on the medial whorls standing up like heavy, well-rounded cords; 2 or 3 more or less irregular secondary axial ribs usually developed between each pair of primary ribs on the spire; on the body commonly reduced to peripheral tubercles; on the early whorls usually 8 to 10 equisized and equispaced^ well-rounded and somewhat undulatory axials crossed by 3 or 4 rather prominent spiral cords. Spirals subequal and equispaced, the posterior and medial of the early primaries outlining the periphery of the later whorls and a little more prominent than the other spirals; posterior peripheral spiral forming the axis of the prominent varical spines; 3 or 4 slightly less prominent lirae intercalated between the posterior peripheral primary and the posterior suture with or without additional secondary threadlets; 2 to 4 threadlets also intercalated between the 2 peripheral spirals; 10 primaries in front of the periphery on the body, subequal and regularly spaced, the wider interspaces threaded with 1 or 2 fine lirae; sculpture on the pillar less regular, about half a dozen primaries, as a rule, with intercalated secondaries. Anterior fasciole crowded with about a dozen very fine, wavy threadlets. Aperture exclusive of the anterior canal broadly oval, feebly notched posteriorly. Outer lip obscurely angulated at the periphery, the margin finely crenate in harmony with the spiral sculpture. Inner wall of aperture excavated at the base of the body; labium reflected, forming a heavy callus, its thin, sharp margin discrete from the body wall; corrugations within the margin rather heavy on the posterior half. Anterior canal long and very slightly flexed toward its extremity, the former canals, one for each varix, slightly divergent. Final canal roofed over and almost entirely closed by a thin, laminar plate of callus, the continuation of the callus which reinforces the inner wall of the aperture; a linear opening in the figured specimen but doubtless closed in the perfect
adult.

518 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Dimensions of lectotype: Height, 49 millimeters; length of aperture, 34 millimeters; diameter, including varices, 26 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 19 millimeters.
Lectotype and juvenile topotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371885.
Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla.
Murew chipolanus though small compared with many of the Eecent representatives of the group is taller than any other Mureao known from the Chipola. Almost half its length, however, is included in the very slender, tubular pillar. Worn and imperfect specimens may approach rather closely to M. dasws, a more compact form with a lower, broader spire, a relatively broader body, and a shorter, less slender canal. The tendency toward the development of spines is much stronger in M. cMpolanus, but the spiral sculpture is not so close nor so regular. Even in the young shells the sculptural differences are sufficiently marked to permit the separation of the two species.
Mureao (Murex) recurvirostris Broderip, widespread in the mid-Americas from the lower Miocene to the Recent, is a similar species but has a shorter canal and is.less slender and less spinose.
The closely allied domingensis Sowerby from the Gurabo formation of the Dominican Eepublic is even broader relatively than recurmrostris, and spines are little or not at all developed.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212P, 2213C, 3419r, 7151P.
Murex (Murex) gilli <Maury)
1910. Fusus Gilli Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 19, pi. 5, fig. 3.
Shell with six convex whorls of which the first three are smooth and the remainder sculptured. Spiral sculpture of welldefined threads alternating in size. Longitudinal sculpture of rounded riblets (ten on the last whorl). Suture waved; pillar nearly straight; aperture and canal keyhole-shaped. Length of shell 9 millimeters; greatest width 4 millimeters.
Named in honor of Professor Gill of Cornell University. Oak Grove, Fla. Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
This is the tip of a species closely allied to Mureao chipolanus Dall and of approximately the same dimensions.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.
Murex (Murex) dasus Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIII, figure 4
1890. "Murex mississippiensis" Conrad. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 139 (in part). Not Hurex mississippiensis Conrad 1848, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour.. 2d ser., vol. 1, p. 116. pi. 11, fig. 30. (Type locality, Vicksburg, Miss.)
1915. "Murex mississippiensis" Conrad. Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 73 (in part), figure excluded.

Shell rather small for the group, moderately heavy, stout fusiform, the maximum diameter falling behind the median horizontal. Whorls of conch 6% to 7, broadly convex, rapidly increasing in diameter. Body whorl inflated, abruptly constricteid into the moderately long and slender pillar; suture line inconspicuous, irregularly crenulated by the axial ribbing of the preceding whorl. Protoconch small, smooth, conic, flattened behind, coiled 3% times; initial turn immersed, the succeeding volutions feebly convex; the close of the protoconch indicated by a narrow, elevated, arcuate riblet. Axial sculpture on the earliest whorls of the conch of about 8 sharply rounded, well-elevated costae, separated by narrower intercostals; 10 or 11 conspicuously inequal axials on the medial portion of the shell; reduced on the final whorls of the spire and the body to 3 varices with 1 to 3 irregular riblets or peripheral nodes in the intervarical spaces; body varices and the final varix on the spire usually produced into short, sharp spines, the primary spirals forming the midribs of the spines, the fine edges proximate and open 'toward the aperture; 1 or 2 series of varical spines also developed on the pillar. Spiral sculpture close, sharp, and regular; primary spirals on the early whorls usually 4, the anterior scarcely emergent behind the suture line, the posterior less elevated than those in front of it; filamentary secondaries intercalated except on the very earliest whorls; number of primaries'increasing, by the strengthening of the secondaries and the introduction of further intercalates, to about 7 on the final whorl of the spire, and 20 on the body and pillar; interprinxary areas crowded with secondaries and tertiaries; threading on the pillar coarser and less regular, but very fine and crowded on the ill-differentiated anterior fascicle. Aperture rather large, oblique, broadly rounded behind, smoothly contracted into the little more than linear opening of the anterior canal; posterior canal obscurely indicated. Labrum broadly and asymmetrically arcuate, varicated behind the margin; the margin in the holotype thin and finely crenulated in harmony with the spirals; inner surface of vai'ix elevated and heavily denticulated from the commissure to the entrance to the anterior canal, the denticles approximately 15 and corresponding roughly in position to the spaces between the primary spirals; a similar denticle also developed on the posterior portion of the body wall and with the posterior denticle of the labrum defining the siphonal channel. Labium smoothly excavated, heavily glazed, the wash thinning on the base of the body so that the spiral sculpture t shows through it. Pillar straight, reinforced, the margin of the wash standing apart from the wall of the pillar, corrugated within the margin by 4 to 6 rugose denticles. Anterior
canal moderately long and straight with parallel proximate margins, obliquely truncate at its extremity.
Dimensions of slightly imperfect holotype: Height, 33.4 millimeters; length of aperture, 22 millimeters;

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

519

diameter including spines, 20.5 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 15 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112057. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Murex dasus is a shorter, stouter species than M. chipolanus Ball. The pillar, which is incomplete in the type, is not so attenuated as in M. chipolanus, the tendency toward the development of spines is not so strong, and the spiral sculpture is more crqwded and more regular. The sculpture behind the periphery in M. dasus is similar in character to that in front of it, while in M. chipolanus it differs both in the prominence of the spirals and in the spacing. Murex mississippiensis from the Vicksurg is a smaller but heavier species, with more numerous axials on the earlier whorls and more prominent varices on the later. There is apparently no tendency toward the development of spines either in the Vicksburg form or in Murex tritonopsis Heilprin, the Tampa analog. The spirals, too, are more numerous on the early volutions and more even in If. mississippiensis than they are in the Chipola species. M, dasus is apparently the Floridian analog of M. domingensis Sowerby, a larger and less slender species with a less abruptly constricted body, a shorter, broader canal, coarser and less crowded spirals, and more prominent varices. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213p, 2564r, 3419r, 7151r.
Murex (Murex) vaughani Maury
1910. Murex vaughani Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 25, pi. 6, fig. 6.
Shell small, pyriform, compact, resembling in shape young specimens of M. messorius Sowerby of the Pliocene and recent faunas. Whorls about six, the nuclear nearly smooth, the three later whorls bearing each seven varices. On the body whorl the varices are prominent, rounded, somewhat broader than the interspaces. The varices of the shell form nearly continuous, sinuous lines from near the apex to the base of the canal. Spiral sculpture of raised lines, of which groups of two or three are much stronger and stand out prominently from among alternating feebler spirals. Outer lip with about ten strong internal lirae; aperture oval; canal not quite half the length of the shell. Length of the shell 22.5; greatest width 14 mm.
Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Ma. Cornell University collection. Named in honor of Mr. T. W. Vaughan of the United States Geological Survey. Maury, 1910.
This is apparently a young form allied to Murex dasus. Nothing quite like it has been found in the collections available for study.
Murex (Murex) nicholsi Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII1, figure 3
Shell rather small, though probably reaching dimensions greater than those of the type; rudely biconic, the maximum diameter falling a little behind the

median horizontal. Whorls probably 6 or 7 in the perfect adult, broadly convex, increasing rapidly in diameter. Body well-rounded medially, abruptly constricted into the rather slender pillar. Whorls closely appressed, the posterior margin creeping up a little upon the preceding volution, the sutures inconspicuous and sinuated by the axials. Protoconch imperfectly preserved, apparently rather large; final turn smooth, polished. Dividing line between conch and protoconch marked by a narrow axial riblet. Axials on the earliest turns narrowly rounded, sharply elevated, equal and equispaced; 3 narrow, rounded varices developed on the medial portion of the shell; spinose only at the intersection with the primary spiral which outlines the periphery and forms the midrib of the short, open spine. Spiral sculpture rather sharp; 3 narrow, angular primaries on the early whorls, the posterior outlining the shoulder, the other 2 symmetrically disposed between it and the anterior suture; a fourth introduced on the later'whorls of the spire directly behind the anterior suture; sculpture behind the periphery usually finer and more irregular than that in front of it; 2 or 3 secondary lirations may be developed, 1 of them approximating the primaries; spiral sculpture on the body of the type regular; 6 subequal and subequispaced primaries on the medial portion and the base, a secondary threadlet intercalated midway between each pair; 3 less fine secondaries developed between the posterior primary and the suture line, the medial secondary a little coarser than those on either side; pillar girded with 6 or 7 secondaries, more widely spaced anteriorly; anterior fasciole probably closely threaded. Aperture imperfectly preserved, obliquely lobate, broadly rounded behind, obscurely sulcate posteriorly. Outer lip broadly arcuate; margin crenulated; inner surface of terminal varix dentate; posterior labral and parietal denticles indicating the margins of the posterior canal. Inner wall of aperture more strongly convex than the outer, heavily glazed, rugose along the pillar; inner margin of pillar sharply rounded. Anterior canal imperfectly preserved, probably long and straight and obliquely truncate at its extremity.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 25 millimeters; length of aperture, 16 ± millimeters; diameter including varices, 14.5 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 10.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371851. Type locality: No. 3856, 5 to 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.
Murex nicholsi n. sp. is possibly the analog in the Shoal River fauna of M. dasus in the Chipola. The varices are more elevated than in the Chipola species, the spirals more flattened, fewer in number, and more distantly spaced. Murex nicholsi also approaches rather closely to M. domingensis Sowerby, but the Shoal Eiver species is less slender, with a shorter, broader canal, more elevated axials and less prominent primary spi-

520 THE MOLLTJSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

rals. These generalizations are made tentatively, however; for domingcnsis is the most prolific species in the muricoid fauna of the Gurabo formation and the nicholsi material is imperfect and much of it juvenile. The species is named in honor of G. W. Nichols, of Walton County, Fla., who collected the material.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856P, 5618r.
Subgenus CHICOREUS Montfort
1810. Chicoreus Montfort, Conchyliologie syste"matique, vol. 2, p. 610.
Type by monotypy: Mure$ ramosus Linnaeus= Mure® ramosus Rumphius, 1741. Recent in the IndoPacific.
The subgenus is characterized by the 3 foliaceous or digitated varices, and the recurved canal, usually shorter and broader than in Mure® s.s., and almost or completely closed.
Murex (Chicoreus) folidodes Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIII, figure 5
1890. Murex trophoniformis Heilprin. Ball, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 140 (in part). Not Murex trophoniformis Heilprin, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 1, p. 107, pi. 15, fig. 40, 1887. (Type locality, Ballast Point, Hillsboro County, Fla.)
Shell of moderate dimensions, rather heavy, stout fusiform, the maximum diameter falling in front of the median horizontal. Aperture little more than half as high as the entire shell. Whorls of conch probably 7, the early volutions broadly convex, the body increasing less rapidly in diameter than the whorls of the spire; the posterior margin of the closely appressed later volutions creeping up a little on the preceding whorl. Protoconch imperfectly preserved; final whorl small and smooth, somewhat flattened laterally. Axials on the early volutions narrow, well rounded, retractive, arranged in series slightly off set at the suture and performing about half a turn, increasing in prominence toward the anterior suture, equal and separated by concave interspaces of approximately their own width, commonly 9. Varices developed by the strengthening of every third rib, the costal to the right of the varix becoming increasingly feeble and finally obsolete, the costal to the left of the varix, gradually transformed into a rather prominent peripheral node; varices on the later whorls foliaceous, the free edges sharply fluted in a series of short, serrate processes, open toward the aperture; the primary spirals forming the axes of the spines; spines tending to lengthen anteriorly, most produced on the pillar. Entire surface except the apical region macroscopically shagreened by the sharp laminar incrementals, numbering about 4 to, the millimeter over the greater part of the adult shell; the free edges worn down in the type but

probably in fresh specimens finely fluted by the spirals, even by the secondaries and tertiaries. Spiral sculpture well developed. Primary spirals 5 on the whorls of the spire, 13 or 14 on the body and pillar, rather angular and separated on the posterior portion of the shell by angular interspaces, equally prominent on the costals and intercostal®, but more elevated toward the anterior suture; linear secondaries intercalated between each pair of primaries on the third or fourth whorl of the conch, the number of intercalated secondaries increased on the fifth whorl to 2, on the final whorl of the spire to 3 or 4, and on the periphery of the body to 4 or 5, the medial secondary usually stronger than those on either side. Anterior fasciole not well differentiated, threaded with 9 or 10 subequal lirae. Aperture exclusive of the canal obliquely elliptical, emarginate posteriorly. Curvature of outer lip a little broader than that of the inner; margin of outer lip sharply crenate in harmony with the spiral sculpture, the interspiral channels showing up on the inner surface as low ridges and produced for some little distance within the mouth of the aperture. Labium smoothly excavated at the base of the body, heavily glazed. Pillar margin sharply rounded at the entrance to the canal. Anterior canal broad, compressed dorsoventrally, curved backward, obliquely truncate at its extremity, probably closed in the perfect adult; former canals, one to each varixr quite sharply divergent from the final canal.
Dimensions of imperfect holotype: Height, 43.3 millimeters ; length of aperture and canal, 26.5 millimeters ; diameter including varices, 25 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 20.8 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371852.
Type locality: No. 3419, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry,, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
A weathered individual with the characteristic surface almost entirely lost but probably referable to this species appears in the check list as Murex trophoniformis Heilprin, described from the Tampa silex beds. In Heilprin's species, however, the varices are more
numerous and simple, while in the Chipola form faint but indubitable traces remain of foliated varices, subspinose at the intersection with the spirals. Mure® aldriohi from the Shoal River is extremely close and
may, with the collection of further material, prove to be identical. Apparently, however, the Chipola species is smaller and stouter. The number of whorls in the spire seems to be the same in both species, but the apical angle is larger in the Chipola form. The axial varices are apparently more prominent in M. aldricM and more nearly continuous. The axial to the right of the varix is almost or entirely obsolete upon the later whorls of M. folidodes, and the axial to the left of the varix appears as a prominent peripheral node. In M. aldrichi, on the other hand, the two axials persist even on the later whorls, although the axial directly to the

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDQBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

521

right of the terminal varix is relatively feeble. The intercalated spirals are more numerous in M. folidodes and the fine cancellation by the incrementals sharper, bat the surface is not so well preserved in M, aldrichi, a ad differences based on the very fine details of the sculpture should not be emphasized. Murex folidodes may be the analog in the Chipola fauna of the ornate M. comurectus Guppy of the West Indian fauna.
A few individuals of puzzling affinities occur with M. folidodes, and are possibly identical with it. They differ in having only 3 primaries instead of 5 on the early whorls, and in the earlier appearance of primaries. The protoconch of these forms is small, highly polished, and smooth and includes 2 volutions, the initial turn inflated, high and immersed at the tip so that it has the appearance of being slightly tilted. The second whorl is also high, inflated at its beginning but flattening toward its close. The dividing line between the conch and protoconch is conspicuously defined by the change in texture and by the abrupt initiation of the sculpture, both axial and spiral.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213p , 2564r, 3419P, ?3704r.
Murex (Chicoreus) aldrichi Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIII, figure 11
Shell large, heavy, not very stout, the aperture more than half as long as the entire shell. Apex broken away so that the exact number of whorls is not determinable but probably about 7; whorls increasing regularly in diameter and with a moderate degree of rapidity, convex, the maximum inflation falling a little in front of the median horizontal. Body whorl rather abruptly constricted into the broad pillar. Volutions closely appressed, the posterior margin in front of the varices creeping up on the preceding whorl; suture lines inconspicuous, irregular; protoconch not preserved. Axials on the early whorls narrow, rounded, equisized and equispaced, uniform in elevation between the sutures, 9 in number. Varices developed by the strengthening of every third rib, the intermediate costals gradually becoming obsolete toward the sutures and appearing on the later whorls as peripheral tubercles, that to the left of the varix usually more elevated than that on the right; varices 3 in number, abruptly elevated, sharply rounded on their summits, finely laminated on the side toward the aperture, quite strongly retractive and continuous, so that each of the three series performs approximately half a revolution around the axis of the shell. Spiral sculpture regular; primaries 5 in number on the whorls of the spire and 13 or 14 on the body; rather narrow, prominently elevated lirations, equally strong on the varical and intervarical areas separated from one another by slightly wider

areas, the spacings equal on the spire and medial portion of the body but widening slightly on the base of the body and the pillar; secondaries not intercalated on the early whorls of the spire, a single threadlet introduced along toward the close of the spire, while on the penultima and ultima 2 or even 3 lirations are intercalated between each pair of primaries; secondaries on the pillar similar to those on the medial portion of the body; threading on the anterior fascicle very fine and close. Aperture exclusive of the canal ovate, obscurely sulcate posteriorly. Curvature of outer lip higher than that of the inner; outer lip symmetrically arcuate, varicated behind the margin, thin, sharp, and finely crenate at the margin in harmony with the spiral sculpture; lirate within, the lirae persisting to the outer edge of the labrum and corresponding in position to the interprimary areas. Labium strongly but smoothly excavated at the base of the body, evenly and heavily glazed from the commissure to the entrance to the canal. Inner margin of pillar well-rounded. Anterior canal broad, probably of moderate width and possibly closed in the perfect adult. Anterior fascicle sharply rounded, diverging from the canal at an angle of approximately 45 degrees; space between the fasciole and the linear canal opening occupied by a cuneate, shelly lamina; anterior extremity of canal broken away.
Dimensions of worn and imperfect holotype: Height, 53.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 30 millimeters; maximum diameter, 31.5 millimeters.
Holotype: Aldrich collection, Paleontological Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University.
Type locality: Shell Bluff, Shoal Eiver, Walton County, Fla.
This is apparently a larger but more slender species than Murex folidodes from the Chipola formation. The Avhorls of the spire do not increase in diameter so rapidly as in M. folidodes, the varices seem to be more prominent and more nearly continuous, the intervarical ribs retain their original character for a greater distance, the incrementals are not so sharp, and there are not so many intercalations between the primary spirals. The two species run very close, however, and it is unfortunate that they should both have such meager representation. Some of the larger individuals of M. domingensis Sowerby from the Gurabo formation of the Dominican Eepublic are very close to M. aldrichi. In the Gurabo forms, however, the peripheral spiral and the shoulder ramp on the later whorls are more evident than they are in the Shoal Kiver species.
The holotype of Murex aldrichi is from the collections obtained from Mr. Aldrich by the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 3742r, Aldrich collection, Paleontological Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University.

522 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Murex (Chicoreus?) pykiios Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIII, figure 10
Shell rather low but thick and stout. Aperture more than half as long as the entire shell. Whorls closely appressed, broadly convex, increasing somewhat irregularly in diameter, probably about 7 in the conch. Body rather abruptly constricted into the short, broad pillar. Protoconch not preserved. Axials on the early whorls 9, rather low, rounded, separated by equal interspaces. Rather low broad varices developed by the strengthening of every third rib, the terminal varix, however, decidedly more prominent than those behind it; axial to the right of the varix becoming increasingly feeble and finally obsolete, the axial to the left of the varix forming a moderately prominent peripheral node. Spiral sculpture regular; 4 or 5 lirations on the early whorls equal and equispaced and uniformly elevated on the costal and intercostal areas; 5 primaries on the final whorl of the spire, 9 or 10 on the body and 2 on the pillar; secondaries intercalated on the next to the last whorl of the spire, 1 between each -pair of primaries; 2 or 3 secondaries usually developed between each pair on the last whorl of the spire and the body and as many as 4 between the primaries on the pillar. Anterior fascicle decorticated but probably finely lirate. Aperture wide, obliquely elliptical. Outer lip broadly arcuate, varicose a little behind the margin; the margin crenulated by the spirals; on the inner labral surface, about 8 low, short lirae. Inner wall of aperture strongly concave, heavily glazed; inner margin of pillar sharply rounded. Anterior canal rather short, oblique, sinistrally directed; margins parallel, rather close together. Anterior fascicle well-defined, not parallel to the canal opening but changing its direction with each resting stage; the resultant fasciole, asymmetrically arcuate; space between the fasciole and the canal opening filled by a thin lamina unsculptured except for incrementals.
Dimensions of imperfect holotype: Height, 32 millimeters; length of aperture, 20 millimeters; diameter, including varices, 20.8 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 16.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 115771. Type locality: No. 2615, 5 miles west of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla. Murex pyknos is an anomolous and ill-preserved species of doubtful affinities. The sculpture is much more subdued than is normal for Chicoreus, but there are free edges on the apertural side of the body varices which suggest that group. The varices are, however, very low and broadly rounded and do not persist beyond the final whorl of the spire. The character of the intervarical axials and the ill-preserved pillar and anterior canal also suggest that subgenus to which it has been tentatively assigned. A species occurring in very considerable abundance half a mile below Shell Bluff is closely related to M. pyknos but possibly not.identical

with it. The spire seems to be a little lower relatively in the doubtful form, and the adult characters seem to be assumed earlier in the growth of the shell. It is not, however, possible to determine with any assurance the relation of these forms to the type, as they are all young or very imperfectly preserved while the type is an adult with a decorticated apex, and the only other individual collected at the type locality is also an adult in which all traces of the juvenile characters have been
lost. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 2615r,
?5079C .
Incertae sedis
Plate LIII, figure 7
Shell small, solid, stout, fusiform, the maximum diameter falling near the .median horizontal. Aperture approximately half the length of the entire shell. Whorls 5 in the conch, those of the spire buccinoid, increasing rapidly in diameter, the body inflated medially, abruptly constricted into the short pillar. Sutures inconspicuous, finely crenulated by the axials of the preceding whorl. Protoconch small, smooth, twice-coiled, the initial turn flattened behind, immersed at the tip, the second whorl broadly convex. Opening of conch indicated by the abrupt appearance of the conchal sculpture, both axial and spiral. Axials on the early whorls very narrow, sharply rounded, closely crowded, probably as many as 15 on the posterior portion of the conch and 10 on the medial portion, equal and equispaced, smoothly rounded, uniform in prominence between the sutures, wider than the intercostals, every fourth rib on the last whorl of the spire and the body strengthening into a simple varix; axials persisting well down on the pillar, the rib directly behind the terminal varix, however, more or less obsolete. Spiral sculpture sharply threading the conch from the nucleus to the anterior fasciole, overriding the axials and equally prominent on the costal and intercostal areas; primaries 4 on the whorls of the spire, increasing slightly in elevation from the posterior to the anterior suture, approximately 12 on the body and pillar, sharply rounded, abruptly elevated, regularly spaced; a filamentary secondary intercalated between each pair of primaries on the later whorls, and a slightly stronger secondary between the posterior primary and the suture line. Anterior fasciole threaded with half a dozen closely spaced, linear lirae. Aperture sinuous, minutely gourd-shaped in outline, obtusely angulated at the posterior commissure. Labrum arcuate, varicated a little behind the margin, the varix abutting against the preceding volution and posteriorly produced upon it; labral margin thin, sharp, and finely crenate in harmony with the spirals; inner surface of varix denticulate, the denticles normally 8 and elongated at right angles to the margin, except the denticle at the entrance

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

523

to the anterior canal, which is rudely parallel to the canal. Labium excavated at the base of the body, heavily glazed from the commissure to the entrance to the canal; a rather obscure parietal tooth developed directly in front of the commissure. Pillar wash rugose. Anterior canal imperfect in the figured specimen, short, flexuous, bent backward slightly and arched to the right; possibly closed in perfect adults. Anterior fasciole diverging only slightly from the canal, emarginate at its extremity.
Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 14.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 9.5 millimeters; diameter including varices, 8.3 millimeters.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371878. Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla. This small and possibly immature form is probably a muricoid. Three of the varices including the terminal varix seem relatively stronger than the rest and suggest the muricoid sculpture pattern. The anterior canal is imperfect and may have been closed in perfect adults. Somewhat similar forms in the collections have been referred to Favartia, but the rasping incrementals characteristic of Favartia are not developed. No denned group covering these few forms has been found. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211P.
Genus PAZIELLA Jousseaume
1879. Paziella Jousseaume, Revue et Magasin de Zoologie, 1879, p. 325.
Type by original designation, monotypy and tautonomy: Murex pazi Crosse. Recent in waters from 200 to 338 fathoms deep, from the Bahamas south through the lesser Antilles (Clench).
Subgenus PATiTJMITBEX Eehder
1946. DaUimurex ReMer, Nautilus, vol. 59, p. 142.
Type by original designation: Murex nuttingi Ball. Recent off Sand Key, Fla.
Dallimureac differs from typical Paziella in having stronger, laminated varices, shorter and stouter spines on the shoulder and numerous shorter spines below the shoulder. The whorls below the shoulder have strong, irregular spiral ridges, which culminate in the varical spines.
Paziella (Dallimurex) lychnia Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIII, figures 12, 13
1890. Huricidea spinulosa Heilprin. Ball, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 149 (in part). Not Murex spinulosa Heilprin, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 1, p. 108, pi. 15, fig. 41, 1887. (Type locality, Ballast Point, Hillsboro County, Fla.)
1903. Muricopsis heilpr'mi Cossmann, Essais de paleoconchologie comparee, vol. 5, p. 34 (in part).
Shell of moderate dimensions for the group, rather slender, fusiform, hexagonal. Aperture decidedly more
093462 17 3

than half as long as the entire shell. Spire elevated, scalar; the rapidly tapering whorls acutely angulated at the periphery; the broad shoulder ramp not far from horizontal, undulated by the varices and slightly concave at the varical spines; the sides of the whorls nearly vertical. Body whorl rounded medially, obliquely constricted into the rather slender pillar. Number of whorls at least 6 and possibly 7 in the perfect adult; coiling very close, the posterior margin creeping up a little on the preceding whorl. Sutures inconspicuous, irregular. Protoconch small, smooth, polished, twice coiled, the initial turn inflated, immersed at the tip, the succeeding volution also well-rounded though flattening somewhat toward its close. Dividing line between conch and protoconch indicated by a slight thickening of the shell and by the abrupt initiation of the axial sculpture. Varices 6, equisized and equispaced, terminating at the peripheral angle in a slender spine curved upward and backward; a single row of spines also girding the pillar; free edges of varical lamellae on the body fluted by the primaries; intervarical areas smoothly concave; varices obsolete on the shoulder except for the closely appressed, overlapping, retractive laminae. Spiral sculpture restricted to low, rounded, equisized and equispaced lirations, 2 or 3 on the whorls of the spire, the posterior liration outlining the periphery, the anterior almost or entirely concealed by the suture, the medial midway between the suture and the periphery; spirals 6 to 8 on the body, even and regular from the periphery to the base; secondaries not intercalated; sculpture on the pillar restricted to the single row of varical spines, without a connecting spiral, girding the pillar midway between the base of the body and the anterior fascicle. Fasciole corrugated by heavy, overlapping lamellae, one, to each varix. Aperture narrowly elliptical, exclusive of the canal, which is a little less than half as long as the entire opening; aperture obscurely sulcated at the commissure, emarginate at the periphery. Labrum broadly arcuate in front of the periphery, varicated a little behind the margin, finely crenate at the margin in harmony with the spiral sculpture, lirate within; the lirae corresponding roughly in position to the interspiral areas, tending to alternate in length, the longer of the lirations produced far within the aperture. Labium concave, smoothly and heavily glazed, the margin detached from the pillar wall. Anterior cartel compressed, with narrow, proximate margins. Anterior fascicle well differentiated, emarginate at its extremity, flaring away from the labial margin, leaving a narrow, cuneate umbilical opening.
Dimensions of imperfect holotype: Height, 25.5 mil? limeters; length of aperture, 17.0± millimeters; diameter, including varices, 15 millimeters.
Dimensions of paratype: Height 16.9 millimeters; diameter including varices 9.6 millimeters.

524 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371853. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla. The spire of Paziella (DaMinmrex), with its smooth shoulder almost at right angles to the sides and crowned at the periphery by the upcurved spines, is suggestive of a candelabrum. The species may be the descendant of the smaller and more slender "Muricopsis" heilprini Cossmann, from the Tampa silex beds. There is no very closely allied coexistent species. Muricopsis laccopoia to which it bears a superficial resemblance, is rather conspicuously biconic. The axial varices are continuous and strongly retractive forming a series of small pockets on the shoulder ramp directly in front of the suture and to the right of the varix, and one or two spiral lirations are intercalated between the periphery and the posterior suture. The shoulder of M. lychnia is devoid of spiral sculpture and the axials are for the most part obsolete. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities, 2213P, 2564r, 3419r.
Paziella (Dallinaurex) fusinoides Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figures 39, 42
Shell large and heavy, for the group; fusiform. Aperture about half as long as the entire shell. Whorls of conch probably 8 or 9, regularly increasing in diameter, the early volutions obscurely shouldered, the outline of the later volutions largely determined by the broad and prominent costals. Body whorl inflated, very abruptly constricted into the slender pillar. Sutures inconspicuous, evenly undulated by the costals of the preceding volution. Protoconch like that of Paziella (Dallimurex) lychnia, small, smooth, twice-coiled, the initial turn inflated, immersed at the tip, the succeeding whorl well-rounded, flattening toward its close; dividing line between conch and protoconch indicated by a narrow riblike thickening of the shell and by the initiation of the sculpture. Axials on the early volutions narrow but smoothly rounded, feebly retractive, 6 or 7 in number, equisized and equispaced, uniform in elevation from the periphery to the anterior suture but dying out on the ill-defined shoulder; outer margin of the shoulder coronated with short, sharp spines formed by the intersection of the axials with the peripheral spiral. Axials on the later volutions prominent, broadly rounded, varicose but undulatory in character, disappearing rather abruptly a little in front of the posterior suture, thus forming an obscure shoulder; axials persisting, however, to the anterior suture and well down to the base of the body and appearing on the pillar as closely appressed, overlapping folds; component laminae of the varices occasionally free, visible only on the apertural side of the varix and only on the later volutions; sharply frilled by the spirals but not produced into spines except on the shoulder and

the medial portion of the pillar; intervarical areas concave and of approximately the same width as the varices. Spiral threading sharp; lirae narrow, elevated, angular, the primaries 3 in number on the early whorls, 4 or 5 on the penultima and antepenultima, and 7 to 9 on the body exclusive of the pillar, separated by flattened interspaces approximately double the width of the spirals; posterior primary outlining the periphery and forming the midrib of the short, varical spines; 1 or, on the later whorls, 2 threadlets intercalated between the periphery and the suture line and undulated in harmony with the suture; a secondary regularly intercalated between the peripheral spiral and the spiral next in front of it; 1 or 2 finer spirals at the extreme base of the body; pillar girded with 3 simple primaries, a series of short spines one to each varix parallel to the primaries, and 1 or 2 irregular spirals in front of the spines. Anterior fasciole sharply rounded, laminated by the extremities of the varices, not spirally threaded. Aperture spatulate, oblique, broadest posteriorly, not sulcated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip arcuate, varicated behind the margin, thin and sharply crenate at the margin in harmony with the spirals, lirate within, the lirae usually short and corresponding in position to the interprimary areas. Inner wall of aperture excavated at the base of the body, smoothly and heavily glazed. Pillar moderately long and straight, corrugated just behind the entrance to the canal, with 3 to 6 lirations at right angles to the axis. Anterior canal long and slender, the margins proximate and parallel. Anterior fasciole diverging slightly, leaving a narrow, umbilical chink between the fasciole and the inner margin of the canal.
Dimensions of incomplete holotype: Height, 36.7 millimeters; length of aperture, 20 millimeters; maximum diameter, 16.5 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 14 millimeters; maximum diameter, 7.5 millimeters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371854. Type locality: No. 2564, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Elver, Calhoun County, Fla. Paziella (Dallimurex) fusinoides is well characterized by its conspicuously fusiform outline. The costals are as broad as the intercostals and broadly rounded on their summits, though their muricoid character is indicated in the free edges, which are crenulate in harmony with the spiral sculpture and are visible only on the apertural face of the varix. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 25641', 3419 r .
Genus PTEEOPUBPUBA Jousseaume
1879. Pteropurpura Jousseaume, Revue et Magasin de Zoologie, ser. 3, vol. 7, p. 334.
=Pteronotus Swainson, 1833, Zool. Illustrations, ser. 2, vol. 3, pi. 122 (type by monotypy: Murex pinnatus Swainson, Recent in the China Sea") =Pteronotus

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

525

pinnatus Swainson, 1840, Malacology, p. 296. Not "Pteronotus" Rafinesque, 1815.
Type by original designation: Murex macropteron Deshayes. Eocene, Calcaire grossier of the Paris Basin.
The adult whorls are trivaricate, the varices set at angles of 120°. The peripheral node in the intervarical space on the later volutions corresponds to a rib on the earlier volutions. The free edges of the lamellae that make up the varix are exposed on the face toward the aperture and, in spirally sculptured forms, are more or less crepey. The aperture is obliquely pyriform, not angulated nor channeled posteriorly. The outer lip is arcuate, dentate within, and the margin crenulated in harmony with the spirals. The peristome is continuous around the commissure. Both the parietal glaze and the pillar are smooth. The pillar margin is rounded and flexed at the entrance to the canal. The canal is flattened dorsoventrally, flexed, and recurved. The margins above the canal are parallel and closely proximate but do not meet.
Pteropurpura is allied with Thais rather than with Murex, because of the lateral nucleus of the operculum, but it lacks a diagnostic character of Thais, the spur on the margin of the labrum a little behind the entrance to the anterior canal. The recent representatives are, as a rule, deeper water forms than Thais, and the shell devices of their shallow-water relatives may be unnecessary in their less troubled environment.
a. Spiral sculpture behind the periphery of the whorl usually restricted to a single more or less obscure liration. .......... Pteropurpura dryas Gardner, n. sp.
b. Spiral sculpture behind the periphery of the whorl not restricted to a single liration. .Pteropurpura virginiae (Maury)
Pteropurpura dryas Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIII, figures 9
Shell rather small for the group, stout, trivaricate, the maximum diameter falling behind the median horizontal. Aperture decidedly more than half as long as the entire shell. Whorls of spire inflated, obtusely angulated at the periphery, rapidly increasing in diameter. Body whorl relatively large, constricted at the base, rendered somewhat cuneate by the axial varices. Whorls of conch probably 6, closely appressed, separated by impressed linear sutures, undulated by the varices of both the whorl in front of the suture and that behind it. Protoconch not preserved but certainly small. Earliest whorl of conch sculptured with 9 subequal and equispaced axial ribs, the number gradually diminishing with the growth of the shell and the character changing; final whorl of spire and body triangulated by 3 rather broad, foliated flanges, the terminal flange the broadest of the 3, the dozen or more component laminae visible on the front of the varix; varix crenulated by the spiral scultpure and produced backward on the pre-

ceding whorl almost or quite to the periphery; intervarical rib on the later whorls reduced to a rather prominent peripheral tubercle. Spirals obscure and irregular, increasing in number and prominence with the growth of the shell; early whorls usually sculptured with 2 low, rounded lirations, the anterior the more prominent and outlining the obscure peripheral angle; posterior spiral on the later whorls of the type indicated chiefly by the outline of the margin of the varices; a third spiral introduced directly behind the suture on the last whorl of the spire becoming on the body, almost but not quite so prominent as the peripheral spiral; 2 or 3 less prominent lirations on the base of the body and irregular secondaries intercalated in the much wider interspaces. Lirae on the anterior fascicle obscure. Aperture oblique, pyriform, broadly rounded behind. Outer lip varicated, the edge of the labral portion of the peristome broadly rounded and crenulated in harmony with the primary spirals; half a dozen obtuse denticles developed a short distance within the margin. Labium feebly convex, reinforced. Pillar sharply rounded and flexed at the entrance to the canal. Anterior canal less than half as long as the aperture including the canal, very narrow, with a backward twist, the margins parallel and proximate but not in contact. Anterior fasciole sharply differentiated, truncate at its extremity, the former fascicles, one to each varix, diverging slightly from the final fasciole.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 29 millimeters; length of aperture, 18.3 millimeters; diameter including varices, 20 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 11.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371855. Type locality: No. 5630, 100 yards below Oak Grove Bridge, Yellow Eiver, Okaloosa County, Fla. Pteropurpura dryas is the analog in the Oak Grove fauna of P. virginiae (Maury) in the Chipola. The general character of the sculpture is the same in both, but the Oak Grove species is larger than the Chipola and decidedly stouter. The spirals are not so numerous nor so evenly developed, especially behind the periphery and upon the spire; the aperture is more oblique and the anterior canal more twisted than in Miss Maury's species. Both species are doubtless related genetically to the more slender P. postii Ball from the Tampa silex beds, but the similarity between the Tampa and Chipola forms is much more striking than that between the Tampa and the later Oak Grove forms. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, locality 5630r ; Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.
Pteropurpura virginiae (Maury)
1910. Murex Virginiae Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 25, pi. 6, fig. 5.
Shell small with some resemblance to Typhis, trigonal, biconic; whorls six; the two later being sharply carinated at

526 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

the shoulders. Varices six, the alternate three being much more pronounced and giving the shell its triangular form. Spiral sculpture of raised threads which on the last whorl alternate with one or two finer, intercalated lines. Fainter, longitudinal threads form with the spirals a. fine cancellation on the last whorl. Aperture oval, slightly more than half the length of the shell; canal narrow, reflexed. Length of shell 15; greatest width 8 millimeters.
This shell recalls M. shilohensis Heilprin from the Miocene of Shiloh, New Jersey, but that species has eight subequal varices. The variety burnsi of M. shilohensis has six varices like the Chipola shell, but they are very much more prominent.
Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Fla. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.

body number only a few, though the shell in many specimens is twice as large. The aperture is more oblique in P. dryus, the anterior canal more twisted, and the anterior fasciole more sharply differentiated. P. postii from the Tampa silex beds, a possible ancestor, is more than twice as large as P. virginiae but has the same general outline. The primary varices, furthermore, are more sharply defined on the spire, and the spirals on the body are not so wide but more numerous. Both species are rare.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 22132, Cornell University collection.

The conch of an apparently mature specimen in the collection of the United States National Museum includes 5 volutions, while the rather small, smooth, subcylindrical protoconch is coiled 2y2 times. The protoconch is somewhat flattened behind owing to the partial immersion of the initial half turn. The two remaining whorls increase more rapidly in height than in diameter. The first of these is highly inflated, but the final turn is flattened toward its close. The axials upon the earliest whorls run as high as 9 in number and are subequal and sharply rounded on their summits but not acute nor varicated. On the latest volution, however, there are 3 more or less foliaceous varices, the component laminae discrete in the terminal varix but more or less fused on the periphery of the whorl in the earlier varices. The intervarical ribs become decreasingly prominent and on the body are reduced to obtuse tubercles. The spirals are not prominent, but they are distinct and regular, the cord that outlines the periphery, the broadest and most elevated of all. Behind the periphery, on the earlier whorls, there are usually 3 approximately equal spirals and in front of it 1 or 2 narrower threadlets. The spirals behind the periphery on the body are relatively low and flat, and a secondary is usually intercalated. The spirals in front of the periphery of the body, both the primaries and the secondaries, are rather sharp relatively. The primaries run probably about 10, with 1 or 2 secondaries intercalated between each pair. The spirals persist across the apertural surface of the terminal varix and crenulate the component laminae and the margin of the peristome. The labrum is rather sharply emarginate about halfway between the periphery and the suture, and its inner surface is reinforced by half a dozen obtuse denticles. The pillar is sharply rounded and twisted in line with the former canal. The final canal is rather wide with proximate, parallel margins. The anterior fasciole is not sharply differentiated and is obliquely truncate at its extremity.
The Oak Grove analogue, Pteropurpura dryas, is larger and stouter. The axial ribs become varicose earlier than in P. virginiae, and the spiral sculpture is more obscure and less regular, especially on the spire and behind the periphery. The primary spirals on the

Genus TYPHIS Montfort
1810. Typhis Montfort, Conchyliologie systematique, vol. 2, p. 615.
1944. Typhis Montfort. Keen, Jour. Paleontology, vol. 18, p. 53.
Type by moiiotypy: Murex tubifer Roissy=Pwrpwra tubifer Bruguiere. "Eocene of the Paris Basin.
The shells of Typhis are muricoid in outline but run much smaller and are usually more delicate than those of Murex. The characteristic ornaments of the restricted genus are the 4 hollow, tubular spines, perforated at their extremities, superimposed in some species on the varices, in others ascending from the intervarical areas. The latest of the tubular spines is occupied by the excurrent siphon. The anterior canal is short, recurved, and entirely closed in the adult forms.
An excellent and exhaustive monograph of the family by Myra Keen has recently been published.
The genus is fairly well represented in the Tertiaries of the Paris Basin from the Thanetien upward. Its presence in most of the other well-known fossil localities in the central and southern European Tertiaries and in the Tertiaries of this country has been established, but it is nowhere abundant either in species or in individuals. The Kecent forms are included under less than 30 described species and live, for the most part, in the relatively deep tropical and subtropical waters of the Mediterranean and the west Atlantic and South Pacific Oceans.
The number of individuals of this rare little genus represented in the material covered does credit to the collector. They have been included under three species
Typhis linguiferus Ball, common to the Chipola and Oak Grove, and two closely allied representatives of the subgenus Talityphis Jousseaume, Typhis (Talityphis) alatus obesus Gabb, common, to the Chipola, Santo Dominican, Panamanian, and Bowden Miocene, and Typhis (Talityphis) pterinus from the Shoal Kiver.
Varices rounded...................... Typhis linguiferus Ball. Varices acutely angulated, the terminal varix alate:
Maximum diameter approximately two-sevenths of the height; spiral lirations obscure on the body............ Typhis (Talityphis) alatus obesus Gabb.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

527

Maximum diameter approximately three-sevenths of the height; spiral lirations distinct on the body.......... . Typhis (Talityphis) pteriwus Gardner, n. sp.
Typhis linguiferus Dall
Plate LII1, figure 17
1890. Typhis linguiferus Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 152, pi. 12, fig. 7.
1917. Typhis linguiferus DallV, Pilsbry and Brown, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 69, p. 34.
1925. Typhis linguiferus Gabb. Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 10, no. 42, p. 214, pi. 36, figs. 4, 5.
Shell with two laxly coiled, polished, peripherally-keeled nuclear whorls and six subsequent whorls; surface polished; transverse sculpture of (on each whorl four) strong, thick, rounded varices, which gradually increase from in front backward, each being largest at the shoulder, where it is produced axially into a linguiform, rather pointed spine, between which and the suture the varix is depressed, then rises against the preceding whorl, where it is expanded and appressed ; the spines are bent inward and to some extent backward, the varix is strongly marked by the incremental lines and is linked to the tube, which precedes it by a little elevated ridge, but there is no similar connection with the succeeding tube; the ends of these spines are generally broken and they then appear hollow for a short distance, but the spines are not pervious and have no connection with the interior of the shell; the tubes are moderately large and, instead of conforming to the curves of the varices, they curve upward, outward, a little backward and a little downward at last, though often broken; from the base of each tube a narrow ridge extends forward in harmony with the incremental lines, and behind this ridge is perceptible the mark of an old resting-stage; suture appressed and undulated by the sculpture; between the suture and the shoulder the whorl is somewhat excavated; other spiral sculpture only of a few irregular lines near the periphery, which give the surface a malleated appearance but are not elevated enough to be termed threads or form continuous ridges; the roundness of the varices is not interrupted by them; as there are four varices to a whorl, there are usually three old canals discernible beside the one in use; there is no umbilical chink; the canal is wholly closed, slender and attenuated; the aperture small, subovate and simple, with an elevated rim. Max. Ion. of shell 15.6; diameter 7.2 millimeters.
This species most nearly approaches T. curvirostratus of the Upper Eocene, but is much more slender, smaller, and more elegant, while the Eocene form has at the shoulder only a short, obtuse spine, and the tube is much closer to its succeeding varix than to the preceding one; while in the present form the tube is midway or, if anything, a little more distant from the succeeding varix. Dall, 1890.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112183.
Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek near the Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla.
A related specimen from Oak Grove is more than 20 millimeters high.
Typhis linguiferus Dall is the only described species from the Alum Bluff that is characterized by rounded varices.
Pilsbry and Brown, 1917, report a similar species from the Miocene of Cartagena, Colombia.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2212r.

Subgenus TALITYPHIS Jousseaume
1879. Talityphis Jousseaume, Revue et Magasin de Zoologie, ser. 3, vol. 7, p. 338.
Type by original designation: Typhis eaep&nsus Sowerby. Eecent; locality not known.
The characteristic feature of the subgenus is the alate terminal varix. The four primary varices are compressed and lamellar and produced posteriorly into spinose processes. The intermediate tubercle is closer to the varix behind it than to the varix in front of it. The aperture is symmetrically ovate, the rim of the peristome continuous, acute and elevated. The anterior canal is short, compressed, curved backward and closed. The subgenus differs from TyphinelUis Jousseaume in the expanded flange of the terminal varix.
Typhis (Talityphis) alatus obesus Gabb
Plate LIII, figures 15, 16
1873. Typhis o'besus Gabb, Am. Philos. Soc. Trans., vol. 15, p. 203.
1890. Typhis alatus Sowerby var. o'besus Gabb. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 151.
1922 (January). Typhis obesus Gabb. Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 354, pi. 28, figs. 5, 6.
1922 (April). Typhis alatus Sowerby. Olsson, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 9, no. 39, pt. 1, p. 132, pi. 10, fig. 15.
1928. Typhis (Talityphis) alatus o'besus Gabb. Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 294, pi. 18, figs. 3, 4.
Not Typhis alatus var. obesus Gabb. Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 10, no. 42, p. 214, pi. 36, figs. 6, 9. 1925= Typhis sawkinsi Mansfield, 1925.
Shell short, broad; spire very low; whorls eight, sharply angulated; concave above the suture, sloping convexly below; varices four to each whorl, acute-angular on their margins, and ending in a blunt process on the upper angle of the whorl; tubes moderate, pointed laterally, below each tube the surface of the shell is greatly swollen, and two lines pass anteriorly, one being the margin of the old mouth, the other, in advance of the tube, being similar in character and indicating another arrest in growth. Surface polished, marked by faint lines of growth, and crossed below the angle by a few irregular transverse lines, not ribs. Aperture small, oval, bordered by a prominent, acute raised margin; canal closed, short, recurved; front face of terminal varix marked by five small ribs radiating from the outer lip. Length 1.0 inch, width 0.75 inch.
With the same general surface ornaments and the same number of whorls and varices, the shell has a very much lower spire and the body whorl is a third wider than Sowerby's species. The great variety [rarity] of both species prevents a comparison of a series, but I can hardly believe, despite their similarity in some respects, that two shells of such different form can be specifically related. T. alatus is a long, slender fusiform shell, with a long straight canal and a slender spire. At the same time the resemblance in the ornaments, number of the varices, and of the whorls, and in size render it possible that they are only varieties of one species. My only specimen of T. alatus has not the aperture perfect, so in that respect I am compelled to use Sowerby's figure for comparison. The mouth of my o'besus is much more elongated than Sowerby makes it, and it is sub-augulated instead of being round in advance. Gabb, 1873.

528 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Type locality: Santo Domingo.

analog, is constantly lower and broader in the body but

Shell of moderate dimensions for the genus, kite- with a more slender spire and a much sharper and

shaped in profile, acutely angulated by the 4 axial vari- more regular spiral sculpture.

ces. Aperture and canal about two-thirds as long as Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213p,

the entire shell. Spire broad, acutely tapering, scalari- 2564r, 7151r ; Miocene of the Dominican Republic (Pils-

form. Whorls of conch 5, acutely angulated at the bry, 1922), of the Canal Zone (Olsson, 1922), and of

periphery, the posterior tabulation interrupted by the the Bowden beds, Jamaica (Woodring, 1928).

varices, the sides of the whorls flattened and feebly inclined toward the axis. Body obliquely flattened in

Typhis (Talityphis) pterinus Gardner

front of the periphery, somewhat concave toward the

Plate LIII, figure 14

base. Whorls closely appressed, the posterior margin 1936. Typhis pterinus Gardner, Florida State Dept. Cons. Geol.

creeping up a little on the preceding whorl. Sutures

Bull. 14, p. 52, pi. 10, fig. 10.

linear, inconspicuous, irregular. Protoconch smooth, Shell polished, of moderate dimensions for the genus,

polished, twice-coiled; initial turn highly inflated, im- rather thin and slender except for the flangelike vari-

mersed only at the tip, the succeeding volution well- ces ; spire scalariform; body including the varices cune-

rounded, less convex and obscurely tabulated toward ate; maximum diameter falling a little in front of the

its close. Opening of conch indicated by a slight median horizontal. Whorls of conch probably 6 in the

change in the texture of the shell and by the first adult; closely appressed, the posterior margin creeping

appearance of the axial sculpture. Axials on the up a little on the preceding whorl, acutely angulated

earliest whorls restricted to the 4 intervarical tubes at the periphery. Shoulder slightly concave, rippled

which radiate from the narrow, obtuse shoulder at by the intervarical tubes; sides of whorls flattened,

right angles to the axis of the shell; varices on the later slightly inclined toward the axis; body somewhat

whorls 4 in number, compressed and acutely angulated rounded medially, gently concave anteriorly. Sutures

at their summits, the terminal varix much expanded linear, inconspicuous, zigzagging around the varices.

and flattened upon the apertural face, produced along Protoconch known only from the final whorl but appar-

the peripheral angle, recurved and acutely pointed; ently small, smooth, and highly polished. Opening of

incrementals fine, strongly retractive on the shoulder, conch indicated by a change in the texture of the shell

flexuous on the anterior canal. Spirals obscure and and by the initiation of the axial sculpture in the form

commonly obsolete, reduced to a few faint and irregu- [ of obtuse tubercles. Primary varices 4, the terminal

lar lirations, least feeble on the terminal varix. Aper- varix a rather broad, laminar flange, the other 3 body

ture rather small, smoothly rounded posteriorly, ob- varices compressed, acutely angulated ridges, termi-

tusely angulated in front. Peristome continuous, the nating at the shoulder in compressed, posteriorly di-

rim elevated. Inner surface smoothly and heavily rected tubes; short circular tubes also developed in the

glazed. Labral varix flattened on its apertural face; intervarical areas, directed at right angles to the axis

area between the spinose peripheral angle and the of the shell, perforate at their outer extremities, but

corresponding varix on the penultima occupied by a only the last tube in direct communication with the

rather heavy trigonal plate which is the upcurved body cavity. Spiral sculpture restricted to very fine,

lateral margin of one of the shoulder plates. Anterior feeble, rather widely spaced, irregular lirations, com-

canal entirely closed in the adult form, compressed and monly obsolete on the spire, strengthening toward the

slightly twisted backward and to the right; line of the aperture, usually 3' to 5 on the terminal wing, absent

former opening indicated by a free edge overlapping on the anterior canal. Incrementals macroscopic,

the labral varix; former canals, one for each varix, retractive and somewhat arcuate on the shoulder, flexu-

superimposed on the true canal, their anterior extremi- ous on the anterior canal, and relatively prominent on

ties slightly divergent.

the apertural surface of the terminal varix, where they

Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 21 milli- are crenulated and puckered by the fine, sharp spiral

meters; diameter including varices, 14 millimeters; lirae. Apertural opening rather small, oval, widening

diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 10 a little posteriorly, the margin elevated slightly above

millimeters.

the body surface; peristome continuous, smoothly

Figured specimen: U. S. IST^t. Mus. No. 371859, from rounded; inner surface glazed; area between the labral

locality 2564, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola varix and that directly behind it occupied by a rather

Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla.

thin, trigonal plate. Anterior canal short, compressed,

The species has a meager representation in the feebly inclined toward the right, the former canals,

Chipola formation, and the material is rather imperfect, one to each varix, superimposed but diverging very

but there are no characters preserved by which it may slightly at their anterior extremities.

be separated from the Bowden and Santo Dominican Dimensions of holotype: Height, 20 millimeters;

forms. Typhis (TuUtyphis) pterinus, the Shoal River maximum diameter including varices, 13 millimeters;

CTBNOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

529

diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 8 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371860. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Kiver, Walton County, Fla. Typhis (Talityphis) pterinus is allied to Typhis (Talityphis) alatus obesus Gabb, but the spire is more elevated in proportion to the body, and the spiral sculpture is sharper and more regular than in either the Bowden or the Chipola individuals referred to T. alatus obesus or in T. harrisi Olsson and the subspecies T. harrisi waltonensis Mansfield. The slender spire and the sharper spirals suggest T. alatus s. s., but if Sowerby's figure is correct the aperture in the Santo Dominican species is less ovate than in the species from Shoal Kiver. Occurrence: Shoal Kiver formation, localities 3856P, 3742P, 5184r.
Genus MTJRICOPSIS Bucquoy and Dautzenberg
1882. Muricopsis Bucquoy and Dautzenberg, Mollusques marins du Roussillon, vol. 1, p. 19.
Type by monotypy: Murex blainvillei Payraudeau. Recent in the Mediterranean.
Shell of moderate dimensions, commonly heavy. Spire elevated, usually more or less scalariform. Axials numerous, equispaced, and equal or nearly so. Spirals usually coarse and regularly spaced, equal or alternating in strength. Aperture oblique, broadest posteriorly. Labrum varicose, lirate within. Labium excavated at the base of the body, heavily glazed, smooth. Anterior canal moderately long, open, with parallel, proximate margins. Umbilicus narrowly perforate or closed.
The nucleus of the operculum, unlike that of Murex and TJrosalpinx, is apical or nearly so. Muricopsis differs further from Murex in the normally smaller and more fusiform outline, the less ornate axial sculpture, and the open, anterior canal.
Muricopsis has a wide distribution from the early Tertiary on to the Eecent. The Kecent species are for the most part denizens of the warm and shallow waters.
Muricopsis laccopoia Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIT, figures 40, 41
Shell rather small, biconic. Aperture more than half as long as the entire shell. Spire obscurely scalariform, the posterior ramp broken by the axial sculpture; whorls probably 7 in number in the perfect adult, regularly and rapidly increasing in diameter. Body relatively large, inflated medially, abruptly constricted into the rather slender pillar. Volutions closely appressed, the posterior margin transgressing at the varices upon the preceding whorl. Sutures inconspicuous and irregular. Protoconch rather small, smooth, highly

polished, subcylindrical; initial whorl strongly inflated medially, immersed at the tip; succeeding volution also convex, though flattening on the last quarter turn; close of protoconch indicated by a slight thickening of the shell. Axials 6, narrow, elevated, sharply rounded on their summits, equal and equispaced, retractive, the varices continuous, each series performing about half a revolution around the axis of the shell, persistent from the earliest whorl of the conch to the anterior fascicle; intervarical areas broadly concave, wider than the varices excepting on the base of the body whorl, where they wedge out; intervarical depressions deepest toward the posterior suture and to the right of the varix, where a curious little pocket is formed a character perceptible on the third whorl of the conch and strengthening with the growth of the shell. Spirals coarsely threading the entire conch and equally prominent on the axials and the interaxials; primaries 3 on the whorls of the spire and the medial portion of the body, 3 on the base of the body, and 3 or 4 on the pillar, regular in size and spacing, elevated, obtusely A-shaped except on the base of the body and the pillar, where they are less elevated and more rounded; separated for the most part by narrower V-shaped channels, though on the base of the body and the pillar the interspaces are flattened and of approximately the same width as the spirals; one and, on the later whorls, 2 secondaries intercalated between the posterior primary and the suture; secondary spirals may also be intercalated on the base of the body and the pillar; the primary outlining the shoulder and one or more body spirals spinose at the intersection with the axials. Pillar formed by the closely appressed, overlapping varices, the anterior fascicle also bearing the record of successive canals, 1 to each varix. Aperture rather narrow, spatulate, obtusely angulated posteriorly. Labrum varicated a little behind the thin crenate margin, lirate within. Labium excavated at the base of the body,heavily glazed, smooth except for a few rugae on the pillar near the entrance to the canal. Anterior canal of approximately the same length as the wider opening behind it; narrow, with parallel, proximate margins. Anterior fascicle arcuate, built up from the extremities of the successive terminal varices.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 18 millimeters; length of aperture, 11.2 millimeters; maximum diameter, 9.8 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 9.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 5.3 milli-
meters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371880.
* Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla.
In Muricopsis laccopoia,, the varices are arranged in a continuous series which break down the shoulder ramp into small intercostal depressions, usually threaded with 2 secondaries. A single individual collected from

530 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

the Oak Grove is a juvenile, but it is aparently identical with the Chipola individuals. The individual from the Shoal Kiver is also a juvenile and probably referable to an analogous but not identical species.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213P, 2564r, 3419r ; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646r ; Shoal Eiver formation, ?Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.
Genus UROSALPXNX Stimpson
1865. Urosalpinx Stimpson, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 1, p. 58.
Type by original designation: Fusus cinereus Say. Kecent from Prince Edward Island, to St. Augustine, Fla.
Shell elongated oval, or short fusiform, longitudinally ribbed or undulated and spirally striated; aperture with a short canal. Operculum somewhat like that of Purpura, semicordate, with the nucleus at the outer edge a little below the middle. Lingual dentition nearly like that of Trophon, the lateral teeth having an elongate base of attachment; but the rhachidian tooth has numerous minute denticles between the principal ones, corresponding to ridges on the surface of the tooth, as in the Murices. Ova-capsules oblong, shouldered, widest near the summit, compressed, carinated on either side, peduncle short; base of attachment very small; aperture median at the summit.'
It differs from Trophon in its operculum and from Ocinebra in its smoother shell, want of varices, and open canal. Stimpson, 1865.
Urosalpinae is essentially a muricid in which the varices have been subdued into costals of varying degrees of prominence. Evidence of th.e family relationship is, however, still retained even in the ornamentation, for the surface is rasped as a rule by fine, sharp incremental laminae.
Urosalpinx and Muricopsis may be difficult to separate in the fossil state, for the opercula, not ordinarily available to the paleontologist, are in these genera more definitely characterized than the conchs.
Urosalpinx was probably initiated as early as the Eocene. Both the fossil and the Kecent species are best represented along the east coast of North America and the Gulf of Mexico. The most prolific of the Eecent species is the type, Urosalpinx cinerea (Say), the common oyster drill that has caused such havoc among the oyster beds of the Middle Atlantic slope.
Urosalpinx phagon Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figures 36, 37
Shell rather small, solid, fusiform in outline, the maximum diameter falling not far from the median horizontal. Spire turreted, the whorls increasing regularly and rather rapidly in diameter. Whorls of conch
9 Stimpson adds the following footnote : In the form of the ovacapsules we find an important difference between the Muricidae and the Buccinidae. In the former group they are more or less pedunculated and erect, while in the latter they are flattened, discoidal, adhering by the broad flat base, and generally occur piled upon one another in masses.

5 in number, closely oppressed, the posterior margin creeping up a little upon the preceding volution. Shoulder very broad and rather steeply sloping, the periphery of the whorls of the spire falling in front of the median horizontal. Sides of whorls approximately parallel to the axis. Body obliquely constricted at the base into the moderately long and slender pillar. Sutures inconspicuous, undulated by the costals of the preceding whorl. Protoconch small, smooth, twicecoiled, the initial turn moderately inflated but flattened behind and immersed at the tip; final whorl convex, flattening on the last half turn; close of protoconch indicated by a slight riblike thickening of the shell. Axials prominently elevated, running in the holotype 8 to the whorl from the initial turn of the conch to the body, very narrow and sharply rounded upon the posterior volutions, broad and somewhat undulatory in character upon the anterior, uniform in prominence from the periphery to the anterior suture but weakening upon the shoulder; body axials most prominent upon the periphery, more or less obsolete upon the base; intercostal areas concave and usually a little narrower than the costals. Entire surface shagreened with fine incremental laminae, most prominent upon the shoulder, where the fine, sharp edges rasp the surface almost as strongly as in Coralliophaga. Spiral sculpture subdued; primaries low, rounded, equal and regularly spaced, 2 or 3 in number upon the whorls of the spire, 6 upon the medial portion of the body, 3 upon the base of the body, and 4 or 5 upon the pillar; posterior spiral outlining the periphery; shoulder free from threading; secondaries fortuitously introduced between the primaries, most frequently upon the body. Anterior fasciole arched and corrugated by the axials but not spirally lirate. Aperture moderately wide, oblique, acutely angulated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip obtusely angulated at the shoulder, obliquely constricted at the base of the body, varicated a little behind the margin, lirate within, the lirae produced far within the aperture and corresponding in position to the spaces between the primaries. Labium excavated at the base of the body, rather heavily and very smoothly glazed, the pillar feebly rugose in the adult; inner margin of pillar sharply rounded at the entrance to the anterior canal. Canal moderately long, bent backward slightly, the margins parallel and proximate. Anterior extremity broadly emarginate. Umbilicus imperforate in the young, the fasciole flaring in the adult so that a narrow chink is left between the fasciole and the
inner wall of the canal.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 16.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 10.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 9.2 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 7.4 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.6 millimeters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371856.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

531

, Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.
Urosalpinae phagon has much the aspect of Muricopsis, but it is rather small for that genus, the spire is relatively low, and the character of the surface is more typical of Urosalpinx. The species may be readily separated from all of the coexistent members of the genus by the absence of spiral sculpture upon the shoulder.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, locality 2646p.
Urosalpinx tribaka Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIT, figures 35, 45
Shell of moderate dimensions, rather heavy and rude, stout, fusiform in outline, the maximum diameter falling near the median horizontal. Aperture more than half as high as the entire shell. Number of whorls of conch indeterminate but probably about 5; whorls of spire rather steeply sloping to the periphery, which is about two-thirds of the way from the posterior to the anterior suture; sides approximately vertical. Body large relatively,1 inflated medially, rather abruptly constricted into the broad pillar. Whorls closely appressed, separated by inconspicuous sutures. Protoconch not preserved but doubtless small. Both the axial and spiral sculpture subdued and rather irregular. Early whorls quite sharply rippled by a dozen narrow, obtuse riblets, most prominent at the periphery and inclined to become obsolete toward the posterior suture; axials broadening upon the later whorls, becoming irregular in size and only about 7 in number on the body of the adult, restricted almost entirely to the peripheral region; incrementals sufficiently strong to rasp the entire surface and toward the posterior sutures appearing as very fine, retractive laminae. Spiral sculpture crowding the entire shell; "spirals low, rounded, not sharply defined, tending to alternate in size; peripheral spiral usually a little more prominent than any of the others; spirals least elevated upon the shoulder; primaries about 3 in number on and in front of the periphery and 3 or 4 behind it, with an approximately equal number upon the shoulder and medial portion of the body and half a dozen subequal and equispaced lirae girding the pillar; secondaries usually intercalated between each pair of primaries and even tertiaries developed upon the medial portion of the body. Anterior fasciole raised, sculptured only with heavy incrementals. Aperture spatulate, obtusely angulated and obscurely channeled at the posterior commissure. Outer lip broadly arcuate, thickened behind the margin, thin and finely crenulated in harmony with the spiral sculpture at the margin, lirate within; lirae corresponding in position to the interprimary areas, most prominent a little behind the medial portion of the lip. Inner wall of aperture smooth, excavated at the base of the body. Parietal wash heaviest directly in front of the commis-

sure. Pillar rounded, slightly flex_ed at the entrance to the anterior canal. Canal moderately long for the genus, nearly vertical, the margins parallel and proximate. Anterior fascicle well differentiated, corrugated, not parallel to the anterior canal; emarginate at the extremity. Umbilical chink not entirely closed.
Dimensions of incomplete holotype: Height, 22.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 15± millimeters; diameter including varices, 13.5 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 11.5 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 10.9 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6.2 millimeters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S.-Nat. Mus. No. 371857. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Biver, Walton County, Fla. Urosalpinae tribaka exhibits the peculiar worn and, weathered aspect common to so many of the members of this genus. Both the axial and the spiral sculpture are subdued, and the outline of the shell is fairly regular. There is no closely related species. The Oak Grove form, U. xustris, is of an entirely different type many more whorls, more strong] y inflated at the periphery, vigorous axials reduced on the body to prominent peripheral nodes, and fine, sharp, and crowded spirals dissected by the incrementals. In Urosalpinae phagon, also from the Oak Grove, the well-defined shoulder is free from spiral threading. Occurrence: Shoal Biver formation, localities 3856r, 3742r, 5618r.
Urosalpinx xustris Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIT, figure 44
Shell of moderate dimensions for the group, stout, fusiform, the maximum diameter falling near the median horizontal. Whorls of conch probably 6 in number, increasing rapidly in diameter; an ill-defined and obliquely sloping shoulder; but the outline of the peripheral and anterior portion of the whorl obscured by the heavy axial ribbing. Body obliquely constricted at the base into the broad, recurved pillar. Whorls closely appressed, the sutures inconspicuous and crenulated by the costals of the preceding volution; apical region decorticated in all the material available so that the nuclear characters are obscured. Protoconch small, smooth, twice-coiled, the initial turn inflated and immersed at the tip, the remaining volution rather high, broadly convex, flattening toward the close of the protoconch, which is apparently indicated by a slight thickening of the shell substance and the initiation of the conchal sculpture. Axials on the earliest whorls narrow, sharply rounded, subequal and equispaced, uniform in elevation between the sutures, 11 or 12 in number, much broader on the later volutions and more distantly spaced, inclined to be nodose on the periphery, and more or less obsolete upon the shoulder, 7 or 8 in number on the later whorls. Spiral sculpture

532 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

crowding the entire conch; 3 or 4 primaries on the medial and anterior portion of the whorl and the 5 or 6 on the base of the body usually a little stronger than the approximately equal number of primaries on the shoulder; secondaries and tertiaries crowded between the primaries, all of them separated from one another by linear interspaces and macroscopically roughened by the close axial striation; spirals on the pillar lower, broader, more flattened, and more irregular in arrangement than the spirals on the rest of the conch; lirations on the anterior fascicle very close and approximately a dozen in number. Aperture obliquely spatulate in outline, obscurely sulcated and angulated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip rather strongly arcuate, not varicose in the holotype, thin at the margin -and finely crenate in harmony with the spiral sculpture ; dentate within, the denticles, approximately 7 in number, most prominent within the peripheral portion, quite evenly disposed from the anterior canal to a little in front of the posterior commissure. Labium excavated at the base of the body but not very strongly. Parietal wash dense, smoothly applied. Inner margin of pillar sharply rounded. Anterior canal rather long, feebly recurved, almost vertical, the margins parallel and proximate. Anterior fascicle well rounded, arcuate, not parallel to the inner .wall of the canal, obliquely emarginate at its extremity. Umbilical chink indicated by the deep linear depression to the right of the fascicle.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 25 millimeters; length of aperture, 17.0 millimeters; maximum diameter, 14.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371858.
Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla. '
Urosalpinx aeustris is remarkable for the elaborate ornamentation. The Shoal River species, U. tribaka, has been so named because of the worn and rubbed appearance of the external surface. Both the axial and the spiral sculpture are much subdued, and even the outline of the shell exhibits no sharp angles or curves. In U, oeustris, on the other hand, the whorls are inflated at the periphery, the axials are strongly inclined to be nodose, and the spirals are close and sharp and finely dissected by the incrementals. Murex veatchi Maury is apparently a closely related species differing from U. aeustris in the more persistent axials upon the body, less crowded spiral sculpture, and more oblique anterior canal. The coexistent species, U. phagon, develops no spiral sculpture upon the shoulder and, as a rule, not more than 3 primaries and no secondaries upon the whorls of the spire.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, locality 2646P; 10659r ; Shoal River formation, locality 3733r.

Urosalpinx veatchi (Maury)
1910. Murex veatchi Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 26, pi. 6, fig. 7.
Shell pyriform, small, with five somewhat convex whorls, transverse sculpture of numerous, prominent raised lines which .show some tendency to alternate but in general are subequal, longitudinal sculpture of subequal varices (six on the last whorl) and of fine longitudinal raised lines which form with the spirals a very fine network, or honeycomb ornamentation. Aperture oval; canal open; outer lip lirate within. Length of shell 21; of aperture and canal 13; greatest width 12 millimeters.
Named in honor of Mr. Arthur Veatch of the United States Geological Survey, who collected the shells.
Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Fla. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
Murex veatchi is apparently a Urosalpinx of the group of U. seustris, but stouter, with more persistent axials, a coarser and less crowded spiral sculpture and a more oblique anterior canal. The species has not been recognized in the material under observation.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, Cornell University collection.
Genus EUPLEURA H. and A. Adams
1853. Eupleura H. and A. Adams, Genera Recent Mollusca, vol. 1, p. 107.
Type by subsequent designation (F. C. Baker, Chicago Acad. Sci. Bull., vol. 2, p. 176, 1895): Ranella (Eupleura) caudata Say. Recent from Massachusetts to Florida in 1 to 8 fathoms (fide C. W. Johnson).
Shell solid, ranelliform, carrying two continuous primary and several intermediate secondary varices. Aperture oval. Labrum dentate within. Labium smooth. Anterior canal long, narrow, partially closed.
Eupleura was considered by Tryon to be intermediate between Murex and Ranella. It may be separated from Murex by the presence of the two ranelliform varices and from Ranella, by the smooth columella and the muricoid ornamentation.
The genus was not initiated, apparently, until the Tertiary. The Recent representatives are confined to the east coast of North America, ranging from New England south to Panama and thence to the West Indies.
Eupleura pterina Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIII, figure 6
Shell small, thin, friable, the dense and polished outer layer more or less decorticated in most specimens. Body whorl alate, the short spire somewhat scalariform. Aperture almost three-fourths the length of the entire shell. Number of whorls in conch indeterminate but probably about 5. Whorls of spire broadly convex, obscurely shouldered, increasing rapidly in diameter. Body rudely hexagonal, the 6 intervarical areas feebly concave, attenuated anteriorly, the varices

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

533

crenulated by the spiral sculpture. Protoconch not preserved. Axials on the early volutions narrow, subacute, possibly 12, separated by wider, concave interaxials; laminar varices developed from the costals relatively early in the growth of the shell, the ribs becoming increasingly prominent, fewer in number, and consequently more distantly spaced; costals on the body whorl normally 6 including the peripheral node halfway between the terminal varix and the laminar varix behind it; varix opposite the terminal varix a little more prominent than the intermediate varices; laminae thin and translucent, flaring at the edges and emphasizing by their outline the shoulder of the whorl; a single lamina, or at most 2 or 3, visible in any but the terminal varix, which usually shows about a dozen. Spiral sculpture meager; 3 well-rounded primary spirals, the posterior outlining the obscure shoulder, the medial girding the ill-defined periphery, the anterior directly behind the suture line and partially or even wholly concealed by it; base of body and pillar corded with 9 subequal and equispaced less prominent spirals of similar character, and the anterior fasciole obscurely threaded with half a dozen finer lirae; secondaries rare and fortuitous. Aperture lobate, slightly oblique, broadest posteriorly. Outer lip obtusely angulated at the posterior spiral, the terminal varix flaring away from the aperture, giving a cross section of the component laminae. Inner margin of labrum from the shoulder to the entrance to the canal broadly arcuate, reinforced by half a dozen denticles elongated at right angles to the margin, the next to the posterior the most prominent; a slight thickening of the inner margin between the suture and the shoulder angle in the adult, indicating with the posterior labral denticle, an obscure channel for the excurrent siphon. Inner wall of aperture gently concave, smoothly and heavily glazed. Pillar rounded and slightly flexed at the entrance to the anterior canal. Canal long, rather broad, sinistrally inclined, the lips parallel and proximate. Anterior fasciole well-rounded, broadly arcuate, not parallel to the canal opening, cut off from it by a thin lamina, the continuation of the parietal callus. Anterior extremity obliquely truncate.
Dimensigns of imperfect holotype: Height, 15.3 millimeters; length of aperture, 11.0 millimeters; diameter including varices, 9.6 millimeters; diameter at right angles to the maximum diameter, 7.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. 371882.
Type locality: No. 3856, 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.
The ranelliform character of the varices is not obvious, but the general aspect of the shell is that of Eupleura, and it may be that the two individuals which represent the species are not fully mature. Eupleura pterina is the first species to be reported from the Alum

Bluff. The similarity to the later species, such as E. caudata Say, is generic only.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 3742r.
Suborder MESOGASTROPODA Superfamily DOLIACEA Family CYMATUDAE
Genus CYMATIUM "Bolten" Koeding
1792. Cymatium "Bolten" Roeding, Museum Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 129.
Type by subsequent designation (Ball, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 47, p. 133, 1904) : Mure® femorale Linnaeus. Recent off southern Florida and the West Indies.
Shell fusoid or buccinoid in outline, commonly large and heavy. Spire more or less elevated. Whorls nodulated and varicose, the varices irregular and discontinuous. Aperture oval. Outer lip thickened and usually varicated, dentate or lirate within. Inner lip smooth, corrugated or plicated. Anterior canal more or less produced and recurved.
The genus is first cited in the Cretaceous and is moderately abundant in the Tertiaries. The Recent species are confined largely to the warmer waters and are particularly characteristic of the Asiatic seas.
This genus is so essentially a warm-water group and so well-developed in the Antillean Tertiaries that its presence in the Alum Bluff is not without significance.
Subgenus LAMPUSIA Schumacher
1817. Lampusia Schumacher, Essai d'un nouveau systeine des vers testaces, p. 250.
Type by subsequent designation (Herrmannsen, Indicis generum malacozoorum, vol. 1, p. 575, 1847) : Murex pileare Linnaeus. Recent in the Indo-Paciflc and possibly the Mediterranean.
The subgenus is characterized by the relatively long anterior canal.
Fragments of, a single individual rather distantly related to the type of Lampusia occur in the Chipola.
Cymatium (Lampusia) sp.
The single individual that establishes the presence of this group in the Alum Bluff is moderately slender and probably attained a height of 65 or 70 millimeters. Only the body and a part of the last whorl of the spire have been preserved. The terminal varix is prominent, but some of the other half dozen axials are reduced to rather acute peripheral nodes. On the last whorl of the spire there are 3 equal ancj. equispaced, prominent primary fillets, the posterior outlining the shoulder, the anterior directly in front of the suture and sometimes concealed. Four or five secondaries are developed on the shoulder and one between each pair of primaries on the final whorl of the spire. On the body the primaries are increased to 6, with 2 secondaries intercalated be-

534 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

tween each pair on the medial portion of the shell. Three lower and narrower primaries with intercalated secondaries gird the pillar and in front of them four equal and more closely spaced lirations. The anterior fasciole is obscurely threaded with 4 inconspicuous lirae. The aperture is pyriform, the curvature of the outer margin higher than that of the inner. The labral varix is heavy, the labral margin rather sharply crenate, and the inner surface rugose, the ridges corresponding in position to the secondary spirals. The inner wall of the aperture is concave, thickly glazed, and corrugated from the posterior commissure to well down toward the extremity of the anterior canal. The anterior canal is rather long and decidedly recurved, with parallel, proximate margins.
There is an undescribed Costa Kican species, smaller than this individual, with a shorter anterior canal and a more prominent but less acute axial sculpture, which nevertheless strongly resembles the Florida species in general aspect.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.

Colubraria sp. cf. C. lanceolata Menke
A fragment consisting of 3 or 4 of the later whorls of the spire is almost identical with Menke's West Indian species. The outline and obscure posterior tabulation of the whorls and the axial riblets and varices are similar in the Chipola and Recent individuals. The spirals seem, however, to be a little lower, broader, and more flattened in the Recent form. It is to be hoped that material may be collected shortly that will establish the relationship between the Alum Bluff and Recent representatives of this persistent race.
The group is represented in the Costa Rican Tertiaries of Port Limon by a smaller, more angular, less finely reticulate species. There is also a closely allied form in the Miocene of Duplin County. The Caloosahatchee species has been considered identical with the Recent form, though the whorls are constantly more rounded. Whether the differences be specific or individual, the line of descent of the G. lanceolata group is certainly remarkably clear from the Chipola forms to the Recent.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.

Genus COLUBEARIA Schumacher
1817. Colubraria Schumacher, Essai d'un nouveau systeme des vers testaces, p. 251.
Type by subsequent designation (Ball, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 47, p. 135,1904) : Buccimim maculosum Chemnitz. Kecent in the Indian Ocean.
Herrmannsen in 1847 designated Tritonium maculosum of Gmelin, 1792, but, judging from the Chemnitz figures, Gmelin's species may be distinct from that of Chemnitz.
Shell of moderate dimensions, rather thick and solid, more or less fusiform. Spire elevated, the axis commonly arcuate. Whorls broadly convex, as a rule, increasing slowly in diameter. Sculpture reticulate or granular with occasional axial varices. Aperture shorter than the spire, narrow, obliquely lenticular. Outer lip varicose, dentate within. Inner lip concave. Parietal and pillar wash heavy. Anterior canal short, recurved with parallel, proximate margins.
The distribution of Colubrarw, is similar to that of the closely allied Cymatium. It appears early in the Tertiaries both in this country and in Europe and persists to the present day. Like Cymatium, too, the Recent representatives of the genus are peculiarly characteristic of the South Pacific and Polynesian waters. The Polynesian group is addicted to self-decapitation. In the normal adult of some of the species the entire posterior fourth of the shell is decollated.
Only a single individual, obviously an early member of the series of Colubraria lanceolata Menke, is present in the available collection of Alum Bluff material.

Genus PERSONELLA Conrad
1865. Personella Conrad, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 1, p. 21.
Type by monotypy: Distortio (Personella) septemdentata Gabb. Cook Mountain formation (middle Eocene) of Texas.
Shell rather small for the group, moderately heavy, lacking uniformity of outline and winding in the adult stages. Protoconch smooth, naticoid, performing 3 complete volutions. Beginning of conch indicated by the appearance of 3 primary spirals, which become increasingly prominent, the medial spiral outlining the obscure shoulder on the later whorls. Higher orders of spirals netted by the incrementals introduced on the interprimary areas of the adult. Axial sculpture not uniform; the ribs of the laterally compressed early whorls numerous and equisized, equispaced and nodulated by the primary spirals, which override them; the regular reticulate sculpture in some individuals exhibited on less than 2 whorls, in others on at least 4 whorls. Breakdown in the regularity of the sculpture coincident with irregularities in the outline of the whorls and of their coiling. Later volutions irregularly convex and axially sculptured with inequal and inequispaced costals with occasional resting stages and varices. Aperture obliquely lenticular, the outer lip feebly arched, varicose and strongly dentate within, the denticles usually 7 and conforming in number and position to the interspirals. Aperture expanded by the abrupt contraction of the body. Parietal wash too thin to obscure the sculpture, but callus much heavier on the pillar and rugose. Pillar short, twisted, and bearing, posteriorly, a pinched fold, which at the aper-

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

535

ture is almost normal to the axis and which on breaking the shell is visible as far as the apical region together with an intermittent series of denticles. Canal short, girded with a few strong spirals, recurved and truncate at its extremity.
Ball10 in 1904 granted generic rank to Personella, although he considered Sassia Bellardi, 1873 (I Molluschi dei terreni terziarii del Piemonte e della Liguria, pt. 1, p. 249), type Triton apenninicum Sassi from the Miocene of Italy, as synonomous. Few of the European authors have had comparative material for critical observation. The material, however, on which Arthur Wrigley's study of Sassia is based included both European and American species. He recognized the importance of the characters that separate Personella from Distorsio on the one hand and from Sassia on the other. The type of Distorsio is the recent Murex anus Linnaeus, an Indo-Pacific shell of more than double the dimensions of the type of Personella, and with a Cassis-like spread of callus upon the parietal wall and a heavily rugose lobe of callus at the base of the pillar. The conch of Sassia is very similar to that of Personella, though less distorted, and the final whorl of the protoconch is reticulately sculptured. There has been some speculation on the origin and the routes of distribution followed by the frog shells and their allies. The group which includes Sassia and Personella is recorded in the Danian in the form of Tritonium (Sassia) faxense Ravn, a surprising record inasmuch as the figured specimen shows the apertural characters of typical Sassia and Personella, groups which in the Tertiary are characteristic of warm water biotas. The group seems also to be present in the Montian, although on the western side of the Atlantic Triton tuomeyi Aldrich, from the Woods Bluff, is the earliest recognized member, and this species lacks the irregularities in outline and sculpture that characterize the later forms. The absence of any common species among the fairly numerous representatives in the Paris Basin and that of the south of England indicates a sensitive group. The evidence assembled points to the development of the group in north European waters in the late Cretaceous and its later establishment upon American shores. Distorsio, on" the other hand, is first recorded in the Oligocene of the Gulf Province. Conrad's Triton crassidens, though smaller than the genotype, exhibits the characteristic irregularity and oral armature, and may, as Wrigley suggests, have developed from Personella. In the European Tertiaries, Distorsio is not recorded before the Miocene. Like so many other of the warm water Tertiary genera, Distorsio has sought refuge in the Indo-Pacific. There is no record in the western
10 Ball, W. H., An historical and systematic review of the frog shells and Tritons : Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 47, No. 1475, pp. 130, 140, 1904.

Tertiaries of Personella, Sassia, or Distorsio. In a group so well characterized, and existent over so long a period, the inference that it did not reach the western shores seems justified.
Personella floritlana Gardner, n. sp.
Plate L1II, figure 8
Shell of moderate dimensions for the genus, rather thin, and friable. Aperture a little less than two-thirds the height of the entire shell. Whorls of conch 6 in number. Spire elevated, the posterior portion evenly turriculate; early whorls obliquely and rather obscurely shouldered, obtusely angulated at the periphery which falls near the median horizontal; final whorls of spire bulging in front of the periphery, the suture line falling in front of the normal plan of coiling, so that the whorl is abnormally high and inflated. Body whorl so inflated medially and so constricted anteriorly into the short, broad pillar that the shell has a peculiar, hunchback aspect; adult outer lip produced backward on the last half turn so that the margin reaches the periphery of the preceding whorl. Sutures inconspicuous and finely crenulated. Protoconch rather large, smooth, polished, naticoid, the tip broken away so that the exact number of whorls is not determinable but probably between 3 and 4; initial turn minute, largely immersed in the succeeding whorl; remaining nuclear turns broadly and symmetrically rounded, increasing rapidly both in height and in diameter. Dividing line between conch and protoconch very sharp, marked by a change in the texture of the shell and by the abrupt appearance of the axial and spiral sculpture. External surface rather evenly cancellated. Axials low, narrow, obtuse, retractive, subnodose at the intersection with the spirals which override them, persistent from suture to suture and well down to the base of the body, separated from one another by wider interspaces, approximately 20 in number on the early whorls, increasing to 25 or more on the body; obscure and irregular varices developed at irregular intervals on the later whorls. Spirals more sharply defined than the axials, the primaries consisting of rather narrow fillets, 3 or 4 in number on the whorls of the spire, 6 on the posterior and medial portion of the body, 3 on the base of the body, and 3 or 4 on the pillar; posterior fillet revolving directly in front of the suture, the medial fillet on the whorls of the spire outlining the periphery, the anterior narrower than those behind it and intermediate in position between the periphery and the anterior suture; a fourth primary may be visible in whole or in part directly behind the anterior suture; 1 or 2 fine secondary threadlets intercalated between the posterior spiral and the suture and between the posterior and peripheral spirals; interspace between the posterior and peripheral spirals the widest ; areas included between the axials and spirals rec-

536 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

tangular and except on the shoulder and on the base of the body laterally elongated; spirals on the base of the body narrower and more elevated than on the medial portion. Pillar and anterior fasciole corded with rather closely spaced spirals, commonly beaded by the axials. Aperture rather narrow, very irregular, abruptly expanding at the base of the body. Outer lip posteriorly produced, varicated a little behind the margin, the margin expanded and flaring, sharply crenulated in harmony with the spiral sculpture. A series of short denticles just within the margin corresponding to the interspiral areas; a heavy rib developed a little further within the aperture and cut up into short, sharp, toothlike ridges, the one directly opposite the base of the body much the most prominent; 2 or 3 finer denticles developed behind it; internal rib becoming increasingly narrow anteriorly but persisting to the extremity of the canal, the serrations usually 7 or 8 in front of the prominent tooth, increasingly fine and more closely spaced toward the anterior extremity. Inner wall of aperture obliquely and abruptly constricted at the base of the body. A heavy parietal tooth developed a little in front of the commissure and a little behind the prominent labral tooth. Pillar reinforced by a narrow, attenuated rib superimposed upon it directly opposite the rib on the inner wall of the labrum and like the labral rib dissected into a series of sharp ridges 9 to 12 in number. Parietal and pillar glaze washing the body wall almost or quite to the posterior suture, the glaze only varnishing the sculpture, however, and scarcely obscuring it; outer margin of the wash distinct, standing apart from the body wall, parallel to the varices, persistent to the anterior extremity, heavily rugose on the pillar. Columellar folds 2, the posterior at the base of the body, the anterior proximate and parallel to it but more prominent, its outer extremity abutting against the posterior extremity of the pillar rib. Anterior canal short, twisted slightly backward and to the left, partially choked by the labral and labial ribs, obliquely truncate at its extremity.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 24 millimeters; length of aperture, 15 millimeters; maximum diameter, 17 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 12.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371879.
Type locality: Sta. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Kiver, Walton County, Fla.
Personella floridana is the first of the genus to be reported from the Alum Bluff. Personella occurs in the Eocene and Lower Oligocene of the Gulf Province and in the Miocene of the West Indies and Panama, but it has not been previously collected from the Miocene of the Gulf. The Florida species is smaller than the West Indian and Panamanian forms and not quite so sharply sculptured spirally. The forms are, how-

ever, so close that the differences may well be due to place rather than time.
Occurrence: Shoal Kiver formation, localities 3856r, 3742r, 5184r, 5195r, 10603r.
Family CASSIDIDAB
Genus SEMICASSIS Morch
1852. Semicassis Morch, Catalogus conchyliorum quae reliquit D. Alphonso d'Aguirra et Gadea, Comes de Yoldi, pt. 1, p. 112.
Type by subsequent designation (Harris, 1897, Cat. Tert. Mollusca British Mus., pt. 1, Australasian, p. 198) : Cassis japonica Reeve. Recent in Japanese waters.
Semicassis differs from PJiulium Link in the absence of marginal spines near the base of the outer lip.
Subgenus TYLOCASSIS Woodring
1928. Tylocassls Woodring, Miocene Mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 306.
Type by original designation: Buccinum inflatum Shaw. Recent in the West Indies and the southeast coast of the United States.
Shell reaching a large size, greatly inflated, spire low. Most shells have only a terminal varix, but some have two or more varices. Nucleus naticoid, consisting of about three and a half whorls. Aperture long, wide, deeply emarginate at base, forming a short canal. Siphonal fasciole greatly inflated. Edge of inner lip detached at base, fused to body whorl above base. Columella bearing a basal twist. Basal part of inner lip bearing many denticles, replaced on middle part of columella by ridges. Parietal wall bearing several ridges. Outer lip greatly thickened, its inner edge bearing long lirations. Sculpture consisting of low spiral bands, modified by axial wrinkles.
All the later Tertiary species from eastern America, and also in.flata (Shaw) and ab^reviata (Lamarck), the latter living on the Pacific coast of Mexico and Central America, represent Tylocassis, which differs from Semicassis s. s. principally in having wart-like denticles instead of long ridges on the basal part of the inner lip. Woodring, 1928.
Semicassis (Tylocassis) alclrichi (Dall)
Plate LIV, figure 6
1890. PliaUum aldricM Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 162.
1892. Cassis (Phalium) aldricU Dall, idem, pt. 2, p. 263, pi. 21, fig. 2.
Shell small, stout, solid, subglobose, with three smooth nuclear and four subsequent whorls; spiral sculpture on the last whorl in front of the shoulder of fourteen primary, strong, flattish, wide, elevated ridges, with much narrower interspaces; a single fine, intercalary thread is sometimes present in most of the channels; the peripheral spiral is larger than the others, but not so large as that at the shoulder; on the shoulder are three primary, more or less rippled spirals, the first at the suture, which is not appressetl; in the channel in front of it is a single secondary thread, the second channel has two, and between the third primary and the shoulder are three fine threads close

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANOHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

537

together, forming a sort of band behind the tuberculous shoulder; the tubercles here are squarish and about fifteen on the last whorl; transverse sculpture of rather regularly spaced, impressed lines, which cut the primary spirals in a way to recall by the result the ends of shingles on a roof, as the irregularities are not nodules, and have their long slope toward the aperture; the shell now described has two past varices; outer lip much thickened, with a deep groove behind it; inside it has about eighteen strong lirae, unpaired and with wider interspaces; inner lip heavily callous, reflected, strongly pustular, lirate at the base of the pillar and on the body; canal narrow, short, strongly recurved; axis pervious; siphonal notch very deeply cut; siphonal fascicle strong, with a deep channel behind it; the callus of the aperture reaches to the shoulder. Max. long, of shell 26.0; of aperture 21.0; max. lat. 19.0 millimeters.
The specimen described came from Ten-Mile Greek, Chipola River, collected by Mr. Burns. Its nearest relative seems to be C. caelatura, which is quite differently sculptured and proportioned. It is named in honor of Mr. T. H. Aldrich, who is doing so much to increase our knowledge of the Southern Eocene fauna of the United States. Dall, 1890.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112207. The type remains unique. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2212r.
Genus SCONSIA Gray
1847. Sconsia Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 137.
Type by original designation: Cassidwia striata Lamarck. Eecent in the West Indies.
Shell of medium or rather large size, ovoid, the spire low and broad, the body broadly inflated. Protoconch horny, small, paucispiral, smooth, the initial turn immersed at the tip. Whorls of spire trapezoidal, increasing rapidly in diameter. Body broadly inflated, relatively large, the aperture more than two-thirds the height of the shell. Sutures impressed. Entire surface spirally lirate, the lirae crowded and flattened except on the earlier whorls of the spire and the fascicle. No axial sculpture except strong incrementals, a terminal varix, and usually, though not in every individual, a body varix, so placed that its sharply defined margin intercepts the reverted pillar callus at the extreme base of the body. Terminal varix heavy, defined exteriorly by a shallow groove, lirate within. Parietal wash thin but widely spread, thickening toward the base of the body, corrugated at the base of the body, and lirate at right angles to the margin of the pillar. Anterior canal short, broad; the margins proximate; nasute and emarginate at its extremity.
The genus has been discussed by Dall,11 Pilsbry, 12 Woodring,13 Wrigley,14 and a number of authors.
11 Dall, W. H., Contributions to the Tertiary paleontology of the Pacific Coast, I, The Miocene of Astoria and Coos Bay, Oregon : U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 59, p. 66, 1909.
"Pilsbry, H. A., Revision of W. M. Gabb's Tertiary Mollusca of Santo Domingo : Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadephia Proc., vol. 73, pp. 301, 362, 1922.
13 Woodring, W. P., Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2 : Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385. pp. 308, 309, 1928.
14 Wrigley, Arthur, English Eocene and Oligocene Cassididae, with notes on the nomenclature and morphology of the family : Mal. Soc. London Proc., vol. 21, pp. 114-116, 1934.

The inflated anterior fascicle and deep, obliquely directed terminal notch that characterize Cassis and Semicdssis are not developed in Sconsia, and both the labral and the parietal callus are relatively thin for the family. "Cassis" nuperus Conrad from the Gosport sand was cited by both Dall and Pilsbry as an ancestral form of 8. lintea Conrad of the Vicksburg fauna and 8. hodgii Conrad of the Duplin fauna, but Woodring excluded it from Sconsia because of its prominent anterior fascicle. Dall treated Sconsia, as a subgenus of Galeodea, but Wrigley considered Sconsia to be more closely related to Semicussis.
Sconsia paralaevigata Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIV, figure 11
Shell of moderate dimensions for the group, rather thin and easily decorticated. Aperture approximately three-fourths the lengfh of the entire shell. Spire very short and acutely tapering, the component volutions narrow but feebly inflated and very narrowly tabulated like the whorls of Buccinum. Body strongly globose, smoothly constricted into the short, broad pillar. Whorls 7 in all, separated by slightly impressed sutures. Apical region decorticated so that the dividing line between the conch and protoconch is lost. Protoconch rather large, papillate, paucispiral, the initial turn well-rounded and immersed at the tip, the succeeding whorl or whorls contoured like the early whorls of the conch. Axial sculpture restricted to incremental striae that strengthen toward the aperture and to occasional traces of former terminal varices. Spiral sculpture also buccinoid; spirals very low and flat, somewhat unequal and irregular, a little stronger posteriorly than medially; about 9 in number on the final whorl of the spire, almost four times as many o"n the body and pillar; interspaces shallow and of approximately the same width as the spirals. Anterior fascicle threaded with half a dozen more sharply defined lirations, equal and equispaced. Aperture moderately wide, somewhat auriculate, obtusely angulated but not sulcate posteriorly. Outer lip broadly arcuate, somewhat produced posteriorly on the preceding whorl; much thickened along the margin, lirate along the inner surface of the varix; lirae from 15 to 20 in number, some of them longer than the others, all of them normal to the margin except the anterior, which outlines the entrance to the canal. Inner margin of aperture flexuotis, well-rounded along the body, feebly excavated at the base of the body. Parietal wash thin but spread over a broadly arcuate area. Pillar heavily reinforced, the outer margin of the callus thick and laminated; surface of callus toward the aperture wrinkled posteriorly, rather heavily corrugated toward the canal. Anterior canal short, rather narrow with well-defined parallel lips; recurved and obliquely truncate at its extremity.

538 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Dimensions of holotype: Height, 36 millimeters; length of aperture, 28 millimeters; maximum diameter, 25 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371888. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Sconsia, paralaevigata is close to 8. laevigata Sowerby from Santo Domingo, but it is decidedly less elegant. The inflation both of the whorls of the spire and of the body is a little higher in the Chipola form, and the constriction at the base of the body consequently more abrupt. The spiral sculpture in the Santo Dominican form is finer, and so high is the polish of the shell that the lirae seem to be subcutaneous. The Chipola individuals though fairly well-preserved are not polished, and the spiral sculpture has a normal aspect. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r, Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.
Genus MORUM "Bolten" Roeding
1798. Morum "Bolten" Roeding, Mus. Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 53.
Type by monotypy: Morum purpureum Roeding= Strombus oniscus Gmelin. Kecent in the West Indies.
Shell rather small for the group but heavy and solid, subcylindrical or ovate trigonal. Spire short, the body large and inflated. Sculpture dominantly spiral and more or less tuberculated or sharply reticulate. Aperture long and narrow. Outer lip thickened and plicate within. Labium widely expanded over the body; the surface of the callus usually granular or papillated. Anterior canal very short, recurved, obliquely emarginate.
The genus was foreshadowed if not actually present in the upper Cretaceous of India and has a meager representation in the Tertiaries of Europe and of this country. The known Recent species are less than a dozen in number, but they have a world-wide distribution in the tropical and subtropical seas. Only a single species is known in the Alum Bluff group, Morum (Oniscidia) chipolanum (Dall ms.).
Subgenus ONISCIDIA Swainson
1840. Swainson, Malacology, p. 299. Oniscidia evidently an error for Oniscia, Sowerby ( :=Morum Roeding), which is correctly cited elsewhere in the text and index; O. oniscus Chemnitz [ Strombus oniscus Linnaeus] and O. cancellata Sowerby listed.
1852. Onisoidia (Swainson) Morch, Catalogus conchyHorum Comes de Yoldi, pt. 1, p. 111.
Type by monotypy: Morum cancellatum Sowerby. Recent in the China Sea.
Oniscia Sowerby, 1824, is an exact synonym of Morum Roeding, and the type is the same for both. If Oniscidia is credited to Swainson then Oniscia cancelldta, Sowerby becomes the type by elimination.

The subgenus is characterized by the cancellate sculpture and the absence of a well-defined sulcus at the posterior extremity of the aperture.
Oniscidia, has been reported from the Miocene and later Tertiary beds of both Europe and North America. The Recent representatives are, for the most part, confined to the South Pacific. A single, mid-American species has been reported, Oniscia* dennisoni Reeve, described from an unknown habitat and listed from the Gulf of Mexico by both Dall and Johnson.
Morum (Oniscidia) chipolanum (Dall ms.) Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIV, figure 18
Shell of moderate dimensions for the group, rather thick and heavy, ovate trigonal. Aperture nearly as long as the entire shell. Spire broad, scalariform. Whorls of conch probably 5, closely appressed, increasing rapidly in diameter. Posterior tabulation wide, almost at right "angles to the axis; sides of whorls of spire shorter than the width of the shoulder and approximately vertical. Body somewhat obliquely constricted into the short, broad, ill-differentiated pillar. Sutures inconspicuous, finely crenulated in harmony with the axial sculpture, the later whorls so closely appressed that the posterior margin creeps up a little on the preceding whorl. Protoconch not preserved but doubtless very small. Axials very sharp and narrow and in the later whorls distinctly laminated, and the free edges fluted by the spirals; the number increasing from 7 on the first whorl of the spire to 15 on the body. Incrementals appearing as thin, papery, overlapping plates, from 4 to 6 between each of the axials on the body. Both the incrementals and the costals persistent from suture to suture on the whorls of the spire and, on the body to the anterior fasciole; approximately vertical on the sides of the whorl but distinctly retractive on the shoulder. Intercostal areas broadly concave, about twice the width of the costals. Primary spirals strong, well-rounded cords, subequal and regularly spaced over the entire conch, 1 or 2 on the whorls of the spire and 11 on the body not including the lower, narrower spirals on the pillar; spirals separated by concave interspaces of approximately their own width though slightly wider at the extreme base of the body; posterior primary outlining the periphery; secondaries not developed except for a couple of ill-defined threadlets on the shoulder. Anterior fasciole laminated by the axials but not spirally sculptured. Aperture narrow, obtusely angulated and obscurely sulcated posteriorly. Outer lip very feebly arcuate, thickened, somewhat reflected, and lirate along the inner margin, the lirae corresponding in position to the spaces Jbetween the spirals. Inner lip widely reflected over the body wall and pillar. Outer margin of callus discrete, parallel to the axis through the greater part of its extent, broadly arcuate behind; sur-

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

539

face of callus coarsely granulated, the granules for the most part irregular but tending to be elongated and oriented normal to the axis along the oblique inner margin of the aperture. Anterior canal very short and broad, its entrance indicated on the labral side by a short, oblique liration. Anterior extremity narrowly and deeply emarginate.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 32 millimeters; length of aperture, 28 millimeters; maximum diameter, 20 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114095. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Mansfield, 1937, described a subspecies, M. chipol<mum tampanum, and reported a closely related, unnamed form. The spire of the Tampa species is more obliquely shouldered, the ornamentation is less ornate, both the axials and the spirals less sharply defined, the transverse lirae upon the outer lip less numerous, and the pustules upon the parietal wall fewer and less elevated than in topotypes of M. chipolmium. The unnamed form differs from the Chipola species in the more inflated body, the relatively higher spire, and the more numerous axials. Morum chipolatium also suggests M. domingense Sowerby in the sculpture but lacks the narrow, welldefined sulcus at the posterior commissure, which characterizes not only the species but the subgenus Herculea to which domingense has been referred. Like most of the members of this group, the form is very rare. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r .
Family PIOIDAE
Genus FICUS "Bolten" Roeding
1798. Ficus "Bolten" Roeding, Mus. Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 148. 1799. Pyrula Lamarck, Prodrome d'une nouvelle classification
des coquilles: Soc. hist. nat. Paris Mem., p. 73 (type by monotypy: Bulla flcus Linnaeus). 1810. Pirula Montfort, Conchyliologie systematique, vol. 2, p. 486 (type by monotypy: Muresa flcus Linnaeus).
Type by monotypy: Ficus communis "Bolten" Roeding= Ficus variegata "Bolten" Roeding=Bw7to ficus Gmelin=Murea) ficus Linnaeus. Recent in the East Indies. The only other species cited by Roeding is Ficus picta, a nomen nudum.
Shell rather large, thin, almost papyraceus, inflated, fig-shaped, imperforate. Spire low, rounded rather than angulated. Protoconch smooth, obtuse, few whorled. Sculpture of conch spiral or delicately reticulate. Aperture wide, pyriform, terminating anteriorly in a long, open canal; outer lip thin, simple, arcuate; columellar lip sinuous, destitute of plications.
Ficus was initiated in the Cretaceous and culminated in the Tertiary. The representation in the Recent waters is meager and confined to the tropical and subtropical regions, notably the Antilles, the Indian Ocean, and the Philippine Islands. Clench, in No. 2 of
695462 47 4

Johnsonia, 1942, reported 18 Recent species and subspecies, 3 of them from the western Atlantic. Only Ficus pwyratia is found in coastal waters and is common only along the Florida coast.
Ficus eopapyratia Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIV, figures 1-3
Shell rather small for the group, very thin, pyriform in outline. Aperture almost as long as the entire shell. Spire very short, broad, obtusely tapering. Whorls of conch a trifle more than 3, rapidly increasing, obscurely tabulated behind, broadly rounded medially, the body smoothly constricted into the somewhat flattened pillar. Sutures inconspicuous and on the later turns intermittently glazed. Protoconch rather large, obtuse, naticoid, smooth and polished, including two volutions; initial turn minute, flattened behind, almost entirely immersed in the succeeding whorl; second whorl increasing rapidly in diameter and altitude. Opening of conch marked by a slight and irregular break and by the appearance of 4 or 5 microscopically fine spirals. Axials appearing within the first quarter turn of the conch uniform in elevation from suture to suture, fine and sharp on the early.whorls and numbering 3 or 4 to the centimeter, less narrow, more flattened and less regular in size and spacing on the body but running about 2 to the centimeter in the peripheral region, thickly crowded on the pillar and persistent even across the anterior fascicle. Spiral sculpture, like the axial, sharper on the spire, broader, and more flattened on the body; primaries 2 or 3 on the whorls of the spire and not far from 18 on the body and pillar; secondaries intercalated on the later portion of the spire between each pair of primaries and between the posterior primary and the suture; secondaries and tertiaries regularly developed on the medial portion of the body and the pillar. Anterior fasciole threaded with about a dozen fine wavy lirae tending to alternate in size. Aperture pyriform; interspaces between the spirals and axials rectangular, elongated parallel to the axis on the spire, square or elongated at right angles to the axis on the medial portion of the body. Outer lip very thin and sharp, obscurely shouldered posteriorly, broadly arcuate in front of the shoulder, feebly constricted anteriorly into the pillar. Inner margin of aperture flexuous, convex along the periphery of the body, broadly concave along its base, the slender columella bent slightly backward toward its anterior extremity. Parietal and pillar walls free from glaze or plications. Anterior canal approximately half the length of the aperture, rather broad and somewhat flattened dorsoventrally, feebly recurved; labral margin flaring, the labial expanding slightly toward the truncate anterior extremity.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 46.5 millimeters; length of aperture, 44 millimeters; maximum diameter, 22.5 millimeters.

540 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114097. Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Cre#k, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Pla. The conch of the Chipola species is so close to that , of Ficus papyratia (Say) of the Eecent Floridian fauna that the differences might almost be covered by individual variations. The protoconchs, however, are distinct. A special study of the protoconch of Pyrula has been made by Burnett Smith, A Contribution to the morphology of Pyrula, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, Proc., pp. 208-219, 1907. He concluded that while the grosser morphological features of the conchs vary little, the protoconchs indicate the degree of development of the genus; and that with the decrease in the number of whorls as the group advances through the Tertiary and into the Eecent there is an increase in the size of the initial whorl. The nucleus of Ficus papyratia is more inflated than that of eopapyratia, and though the whorls are relatively larger they are fewer by half a turn. There is also a slight tilt to the Eecent protoconch that has been acquired since the Chipola. If the number of whorls be an index to the degree of evolution, F-icus eopapyratia represents a stage of development equivalent to that of F. pilsbryi (Burnett Smith) from, the Bowden. However, though the number of whorls is the same in both forms, the nucleus is decidedly lower in the Bowden species than in the Chipola. The surface cancellation is sharper, too, in the Bowden form, and the pillar is less slender. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212r, 2213P, ?2564r, 3419r, Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.
SuperfamUy CYPRAEACEA
Family CYPRAEIDAE
An enormous amount of monographic work was done on the family by F. A. Schilder during the decades of the 1920's and the 1930's. Most of his papers were published in the Archiv fur Naturgeschichte (Berlin) and the Proceedings of the Malacological Society of London.
Genus CYPRAEA Linnaeus
1758. Cypraea Linnaeus, Systema naturae, 10th ed., p. 718.
Type by subsequent designation (Montfort, Conchyliologie syste'matique, vol. 2, p. 631, 1810) : Cypraea tigris Linnaeus. Eecent in the Indo-Pacific.
Shell solid, ovoid, ventricose. Spire slightly elevated in the young, involved in the adult forms. Surface highly polished, smooth, lirate or tuberculate. Aperture long, narrow, canaliculate at each extremity; both outer and columellar lips crenulated within.
Cypraea-like forms have been detected by Stefani in strata as old as the Jurassic. The Cretaceous and Tertiary representatives are increasingly abundant, while

the Eecent species, best known as the cowry shells, constitute a conspicuous element in the tropical and subtropical molluscan faunas. They are also a prominent factor in the political economy of many of the uncivilized tribes of the regions in which they are found. Along the west coast of Africa and inland from that Coast, where the cowries are the accepted currency, the rate of exchange for one dollar of American coinage is 2,000 to 6,000 cowries.
Cypraea s.s. has not been recognized in the Alum Bluff group.
Subgenus CYPRAEORBIS Conrad
1865. Cypraeorbis Conrad, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 1, p. 31.
Type by monotypy: Cypraeorbis sphaeroides Conrad. Vicksburg Oligocene of Mississippi.
Medium size turtle-shaped shells flattened on the apertural face, asymmetrically arched dorsally, the posterior inflation greater than the anterior. Surface smooth, enameled. Aperture narrow, the margins subparallel and following the curvature of the body dorsally. Fossula shallow. Dentition rather fine (between 20 and 25 in both the labral and the labial series in the subgenotype), restricted to the apertural margins. Posterior notch U-shaped, with the sides flattened and parallel. Anterior notch narrow, sinistrally inclined, the inner margin pinched, and a sulcus behind it; the base of the outer lip also pinched and flattened.
Cypraeorbis includes a small, compact group of species from the middle Tertiary of the Gulf Province. Many other species ranging in age from the Jurassic to the Eecent, through all the warm seas, have been referred to it. It is probable that the majority of these should be excluded, if Cypraeorbis is to have aiy value as a subgenus. For example, Bernaya Jousseaume (subgenotype, Cypraea media Deshayes from the Eocene of the Paris Basin) is considered synonymous by Morley Davies. The few representatives of the group in our collections differ in the constriction of the inner lip toward the anterior extremity. Cypraea luridu Linnaeus, cited as a Eecent Mediterranean representative, is a subcylindrical shell that displays an apparent spire.
All three of the Alum Bluff cypraeids, however, have been included under CypraeorMs.
Cypraea (Cypraeorbis) heilprinii Dall
Plate LIV, figures 12, 13
1890. Cypraea Heilprinii Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 166, pi. 11, figs. 2, 2a.
1915. Cypraea heilprinii Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 85, pi. 3, figs. 2, 14 (in part).
1939. Cypraea Jieilprini Dall. Ingram, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 24, No. 84, p. 3, pi. 1, figs. 1, 2.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114103. Ingram, 1939, called attention to certain inaccuracies in Ball's figures.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

541

By some misfortune, the figured type of this species comes not from Ballast Point, the locality cited by Ball, but from locality 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Perry, Chipola Elver, Fla. There is an error, too, in the dimensions: the length of the type is 29 millimeters, not 26.5 millimeters. It is by no means, however, the largest specimen in the Chipola; one individual attains a length of 45 millimeters. Immature forms, such as the figured type, are more cylindrical than the fully mature forms. The adult outline is asymmetrically ovate, and the maximum diameter falls behind the median horizontal. The posterior extremity of the aperture is'inclined toward the left, the posterior notch obliquely U-shaped. The anterior extremity is truncated, the anterior notch asymmetric and inclined to the left. The Ballast Point forms that have been referred to this species are higher relatively and the aperture less strongly flexed at the posterior extremity. Cypraea chilona, described from Alum Bluff, is lower relatively and almost as broad as it is long.
Cypraea ballista Ball, 1915, is considered by Mansfield, 1937, to be nothing more than a subspecies of C. tumulus Heilprin, 1887 (=Cypraea pinguis Ball, 1890). The Ballast Point species is a shorter, higher form than that from Chipola River, and the slope both posterior and anterior is more abrupt. It differs further from C. heilprinii Ball in the somewhat finer serration of the apertural margins.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212r, 2213P.
Cypraea (Cypraeorbis) chilona Dall
Plate LIV, figures 4, 5
1900. Cypraea chilona Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 5, pi. 39, figs. 1, 3 (no description).
1939. Cypraea chilona Dall. Ingram, Bull. Am. Pal., vol. 24, No. 84, p. 4, pi. 1, figs. 3, 4.
Shell large, heavy, turtle-shaped, the greatest height falling a little behind the median line, so that the posterior slope is a little, but not much, steeper than the anterior. Apertural surface flattened, almost as wide as it is long, asymmetric, the curvature of the left margin much stronger than that of the right, the aperture, however, only a little nearer the right margin than the left. Protoconch concealed. External surface smooth and peculiarly susceptible to decortication. Aperture narrow, sinuous, flexed to the left posteriorly. Armature rather coarse. Serrations on the outer lip 20 to 23, a little shorter and less closely spaced posteriorly. Serrations on the inner lip only about 17, a little heavier and less closely spaced anteriorly. Posterior extremity of the aperture narrowly and deeply emarginate. Anterior portion of the shell drawn out into a very short canal, the margins parallel and proximate. Fossula shallow, obscure. Terminal notch rather narrow, deep, somewhat oblique, widening slightly just within the entrance. Shell thickened somewhat

around the notch, thus simulating a feeble flexure of the canal.
Bimensions of lectotype: Length of shell along the axis, 45 millimeters; lateral diameter, 36.5 millimeters; dorsoventral diameter, 25 millimeters. Bimensions of incomplete paratype: Length of shell along the axis, 51 millimeters.
Lectotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498388. Paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497120. Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed, Alum, Bluff, Liberty County, Fla. Cypraea chilona, Ball, which is common only in the environs of the type locality, is larger, relatively lower and broader than the Chipola River species C. heilprinii. Half-grown C. chilona were early referred by Ball to C. willcoueii Ball, which he had described from White Beach. C. willcoaeii attains even larger dimensions than C. chilona,,but it is not nearly so broad relatively and much higher. The serrations on the margins of the aperture are also much coarser. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities ?2213r, 2211C, ?3704r.
Cypraea (Cypraeorbis) tapeina Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIV, figures 7, 8
Shell broad, flattened on the apertural surface, highly inflated on the posterodorsal surface, narrowing both laterally and dorsoventrally toward the anterior extremity; outline as viewed toward the posterior end very high and full but broader than it is high. Surface glaze probably heavy in the fresh specimen. Aperture as long as the shell; narrow, subparallel margins flexed slightly with the dorsal curvature of the body. Inner wall of aperture flattened. Fossula shallow. Labial teeth rather coarse and somewhat irregular, 14 in the holotype, 18 in the paratype, restricted to the margin of the aperture. Teeth along outer lip shorter than those on the inner lip and in the holotype more numerous by 4. Margins of anterior notch sharply pinched, particularly the inner margin, which is set off by the sulcus behind it. Base of outer lip scooped slightly. Terminal notch deep and narrow, with parallel «ides.
Bimensions of holotype: Length, 33 millimeters; lateral diameter, 24 millimeters; dorsoventral diameter, 19 millimeters. Bimensions of imperfect paratype: Length, 49 millimeters; lateral diameter, 35.5 millimeters ; dorsoventral diameter, 28 millimeters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497854. Collected by the Florida State Geological Survey and presented to the United States Geological Survey.
Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
Cypraea tapeina is the most highly inflated of any of the three Alum Bluff species. Cypraea chilona Ball

542 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

from the Chipola approaches most closely to it, but the Chipola species is less evenly inflated and the maximum inflation less posterior.
The species is known only from the type locality and from the type material.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 14436r.
Genus TRIVIA "Gray" Broderip
1837. Trivia "Gray" Broderip, Penny Cyclopoedia, vol. 8, p. 256.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 142,1847) : Cypraea europ[a]ea Montagu = Valuta Jonensis Pennant. Reported off the coast of Europe from Trondhjeim Fjord to the Mediterranean and Aegean Seas; reported also from the Pleistocene of western Europe, from the Pliocene Crag of England, and from the Vienna Basin.
Trivia has been commonly attributed to J. E. Gray, who described it in 1832 in his "Descriptive catalogue of shells." Mr. C. D. Sherborn, of the British Museum, however, unearthed the information that only proof sheets of the "Descriptive Catalogue" were printed in 1832 and that the paper had no standing. Shaw15 and Iredale16 have also commented on this fact.
Shell small, ovoid or subspherical. Spire involute. Sculpture vigorous; a medial anteroposterior dorsal depression marking the line of union of the recurved mantle lobes. Transverse sulcations deep, simple or ramose, continuous with the apertural teeth. Aperture narrow, conforming in outline to the shape of the body whorl. Fossula shallow, the dentition continued across it. Columellar lip crenulated. Labrum thickened, inflected, transversely sulcated within, the thickening continued around the extremities of the aperture. Anterior extremity truncate or obscurely emarginate.
The genus is first recognized at the beginning of the Tertiary. The Recent species are, for the most part, confined to the warmer waters.
Sculpture regular, ridges more than 20 in number along the labium of the adult............... Trivia chipolana Maury.
Sculpture irregular, ridges not more than 20 in number along the labium of the adult. .... .Trivia vatlghani Gardner, n. sp.
Trivia chipolana Maury
1910. Trivia chipolana Maury. Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 26, pi. 6, fig. 8.
Shell globose, inflated, rather thin, ribs fine, numerous, about twenty-five on the lip, where they form a line of fine but sharply-defined teeth. The ribs extend uninterruptedly over the dorsal area of the shell and occasionally divaricate towards the lateral margins. The shell shows a very faint medial dorsal ridge with barely visible grooves on either side. Length of shell 7.5; greatest width 5; height 5 millimeters.
It is interesting to note that this species from the Florida
15 Shaw, H. O. N., Notes on the genera Cypraea and Trivia: Malacol. Soc. London Proc., vol. 8, p. 289, 1909.
18 Iredale, Tom, On some new and old molluscan generic names: Malac. Soc. London Proc., vol. 12, pp. 34-33.

Oligocene is very like small specimens of T. Europaea Montagu, from which it differs only in the faint dorsal groovings which are absent in the Europaean species. T. Europaea (T. sphaericulata Lam.) is found in the Miocene abroad, being common in the Red Crag. Its present distribution is from the Mediterranean north along the continent to Norway. This species appears to be the nearest ally of the Chipola shell.
Chipola marls, Bailey's Ferry, Fla. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
This is apparently a rare species, since only a single individual is present in the National Museum collections. The species attains, however, a length of 10.5 millimeters, a width of 8.0 millimeters, and a height of 7.5 millimeters. The increase in* the number of ridges both in the figure of the type and in the Museum specimen seems to be brought about by the intercalation of new ridges rather than by the ramification of the old. The transition from the sculpture on the medial portion of the shell to that of the extremities is unbroken.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r. Cornell University collection.
Trivia vaughani Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIV, figures 9, 10
Shell small, solid, ovoid, broader behind than in front, highly inflated dorsally, somewhat flattened ventrally though upcurved both at the sides and at the ends. Maximum inflation a little behind the median line, posterior slope consequently steeper than the anterior. Spire involved even in comparatively young forms, its presence occasionally indicated by a slight bulge near the posterior extremity of the aperture. Protoconchal characters not known. Axial furrow rather obscurely defined medially, obsolete at the extremities. Medial portion sculptured with 5 to 8 narrow, flat-topped, well-elevated ridges normal to the axis, continuous across the dorsal furrow, or interlocking along it. Ridges on the posterior and anterior slopes gradually converging till they are almost parallel to the axis; number of ridges increased toward the margins by intercalation but not by the ramification of the original lirae; intercalates irregular in number and arrangement but so introduced that the interspaces are about double the width of the ridges over both the dorsal and the ventral portions of the shell; ridges continuous from the dorsal to the basal surface without change in elevation. Entire surface microscopically granulated, the granules very sparse over the greater part of the disk but crowded along the dorsal surface of the thickened labrum and around the extremities of the aperture, particularly the posterior extremity. Aperture but little more than linear, feebly arcuate, curved more sharply behind than in front; margins parallel. Outer lip thickened, its dorsal margin clearly but not conspicuously defined. Inner margin of labrum sharply rounded and serrated with

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

543

about 20 ridges, which continue unchanged across the labrum but disappear just within the aperture ; ridges on the inner lip only 12 to 15 in number but more persistent. Extremities of aperture emarginate, the posterior notch narrow and oblique, the anterior broader and symmetrical with respect to the axis.
Dimensions of holotype : Length along the axis, 8.0 millimeters; lateral diameter, 6.5 millimeters; dorsoventral diameter, 5.5 millimeters.
Holotype : U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371861. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Kiver, Walton County, Fla. Trivia vaughani is a heavier, more coarsely and less regularly sculptured species than T7. chipolana Maury from the Chipola River. It is apparently a forerunner of the group represented in the Recent Florida seas by T. globosa Gray and T. candidula Gaskoin. Occurrence : Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 3742P, Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.
Genus ERATO Risso
1826. Erato Risso, Histoire naturelle de 1'Europe meridionale, vol. 4, p. 240.
Type by monotypy : Erato cypraeola Risso= laevis Donovan (in part). Miocene and Pliocene of Jtaly.
The name of Erato, one of the Muses, was given to this genus, perhaps, because of its close relationship with Cypraeq, which is derived from Cypris, one of the many names of Venus.
Shell smooth, polished, subpyriform or obovate. Spire short but distinct; conical. Apex submamillate. Final whorl large, inflated. Aperture linear or sublinear. Columellar lip feebly denticulate anteriorly. Outer lip thickened in the adult, inflected and crenuiated within. Basal notch rather shallow.
The genus was initiated, apparently, in the Ore-" taceous and has been represented, though rather meageiiy, in all the subsequent formations. The Recent species, some 15 in number, are, for the most part, inhabitants of the tropical and subtropical seas.
Subgenus HESPERERATO Schilder
1932. Hespererato Schilder. Fossilinm Catalogus, pt. 55, p. 83.
Type by original designation : Erato vitellina Hinds. Recent on the California coast from the Farallone Islands to San Diego.
The subgenus is characterized by the absence of a distinct fossula, the name given to the hollow depression near the anterior end of the inner lip and parallel to the columella. One or more terminal ridges border the Anterior canal.
The subgenus is best developed in the Tertiary of the southern United States and the mid-Americas and in the Recent faunas of North America and northern South America.

Erato (Hespererato) chipolana Maury
1910. Erato cliipolana Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 27, pi. 6, fig. 9.
Shell small, pear-shaped, highly polished; aperture very narrow ; outer lip finely crenulate within; columella with a slight fold at the base in adult shells.
Length of shell 4; of aperture 3.5; greatest width 3 mm. Chipola Oligocene, Baileys Ferry, Florida. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
Shell small, rather heavy, ovate-conic. Spire short, broad, obtusely tapering. Body obtusely'angulated at the periphery, somewhat obliquely constricted in front of the periphery, inclined to flare slightly at the anterior extremity. Conch and protoconch each including 2y2 volutions, the suture glazed, however, so that in unmutilated specimens it is entirely obscured. Protoconch revealed only by removing the surface enamel; smooth and very highly polished, somewhat naticoid; initial turn minute, inflated, partially immersed; remaining turn and a half increasing more rapidly in altitude than in diameter, flattening toward the close of the nucleus. Opening of conch marked by an abrupt change from the vitreous to the procellanous texture. Surface smooth except for microscopically fine, irregular, blistered lines radiating from the apex to a little in front of the shoulder. Aperture sublinear, oblique. Outer lip sharply angulated at the shoulder, feebly contracted medially, much thickened and serrated along the inner margin by about 15 short, lirate ridges, longest medially and very short and heavy anteriorly, the foremost outlining the entrance to the incipient canal. Inner wall of aperture flattened; a series of irregular denticles developed along the inner margin of the aperture, the three in front produced into oblique and somewhat irregular ridges that simulate columellar folds. Fossula obsolete. Body constricted anteriorly into an ill-defined canal, squarely truncate or obscurely emarginate at its extremity.
Erato chipolana Maury is not so broad nor so globose as Erato maugeriae Gray and has a higher, less obtusely tapering spire. The ornamentation on the spire recalls the radial sculpture of some of the Corbula, such as C. barratiana. The character of the sculpture suggests a pathologic condition possibly induced by a parasite, but if this is true the parasite was coextensive with the host.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r, Cornell University collection.
Superfamily NATICAOEA
Family NATICIDAE
Represented in the Alum Bluff group are 3 subfamilies, 13 genera, subgenera, and sections, and 21 species and subspecies of the family Naticidae.
The Shoal River fauna is notable for the abundance of individuals. Ten species have been reported, 50 per-

544 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF-FLORIDA

cent of them peculiar. Natica (Tectonatica) mino is the only restricted form, that is prolific. The other two most abundant species are Polinices judsoni Maury, present also in the Oak Grove, and Natica (Tectonatica>) semen., occurring in both the Oak Grove, and the Chipola. Natica (Stigmaulax) guppiana and Polinices robustus are both restricted to the Shoal Eiver, but the subspecies N. guppiana toulana is rare, and Polinices robustus is known only from the unique type.
The Chipola fauna includes 9 members of the group, 5 of them restricted. Only N. platabasis is prolific but N. alticallosa is fairly common at certain localities. The other two restricted forms Pachycrommium burnsii and P. dodonum are rare at the few localities from which they have been reported.
The Oak Grove naticoid fauna is relatively meager; it includes 6 species and only one Pachycrommium dodonum is peculiar. The most conspicuous forms are Polinices (Neverita) eucallosus, n. sp., which is also rather common in the Shoal Eiver fauna, and Natica (Tectonatica) semen, which is fairly well represented in both the Chipola and the Shoal Eiver faunas. Polinices judsoni Maury, prolific in the Shoal River formation, is abundant at one locality in the Oak Grove sand and is present at three others. N. precursor and P. chipolanus, both characteristic Chipola forms, occur in the Oak Grove sand but are not abundant. The evidence, so far as it goes, indicates rather local faunas, the Chipola and Shoal Eiver faunas well characterized and the Oak Grove a composite, possibly more closely allied to the Shoal Eiver than to the Chipola.
The group has an unusually wide latitudinal and

bathymetric range, and it is unsafe to draw any deductions from the occurrence of genera alone.
Natica (Naticarius) canrena, the possible descendant of N. precursor, n. sp., and Natica (Stigmaulaw) sulcata (Born), in the line of descent from N. guppiana, are characteristic species of the Eecent shallow-water tropical faunas of the West Indies.
Genus NATICA (Adanson) Scopoli
1777. Natica (Adanson) Scopoli, Introductio ad historian* naturalem, p. 392.
Type by subsequent designation (Anton, Verzeichniss der Conchylien, p. 31, 1839) : Nerita Vitellus Linnaeus. Eecent in the west Pacific.
Shell porcellaneous, solid, ovate or globular, generally umbilicate, the umbilicus commonly furnished with internal ridges and in one subgenus plugged with callus. Surface of the majority of forms smooth and polished. Aperture holostomous, semicircular or ovate. Outer lip sharp, smooth within. Columellar lip subvertical, calloused, nonplicate. Parietal wash heavy. Operculum calcareous.
The genus has been prominent since the mid-Mesozoic and is abundantly represented in the temperate and tropical seas of today.
The Naticas and the closely related Polinices show an unusual sex variation owing to the size of the egg sac. In consequence, the whorls of the shell of the female are more inflated in front of the suture and the general outline more turreted. The subgeneric determination of the fossil species is far from satisfactory.

Surface sculptured with oblique sulci radiating from the posterior suture:
Umbilical rib not depressed anteriorly ...................................... Natica (Naticarius) precursor Gardner, n. sp.
Umbilical rib depressed anteriorly: Sulci persistent across the whorl. ..................... ...................... .Natica (Stigmaulax) guppiana Toula. Sulci evanescent on the medial portion of the whorl.......... .Natica (Stigmaulax) guppiana toulana Gardner, n. subsp.

Sculpture feeble or altogether absent:
Umbilicus only partially closed by a funicular rib: Shoulder of body whorl not obliquely sulcated.................. .................. .Natica (Natica) alticallosa Dall. Shoulder of body whorl obliquely sulcated. .................. .............. .Natica (Tectonica) mino Gardner, n. sp.

Umbilicus almost or entirely filled with callus:

Height of adult shell exceeding 5 millimeters: Body whorl smoothly rounded ...................................

.Natica (Natica) alticallosa Dall.

Body whorl obtusely angulated at the periphery.................. .Natica (Tectonatical) platabasis Gardner, n. sp.

Height of adult shall not exceeding 5 millimeters; body whorl smoothly rounded.................................. Natica (Tectonatica) semen Gardner, n. sp.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

545

Subgenus NATICA sensu stricto
The subgenus, as restricted by Ball, is characterized by a multisulcate operculum.
Natica (Natica) alticallosa Dall
Plate LIX, figure 3; plate LXII, figure 10
1892. Natica alticallosa Dall. Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 365, pi. 22, fig. 28.
Shell of four well-rounded whorls, with the suture wellmarked and the surface smooth except for lines of growth which are sometimes slightly elevated near the suture; male with the suture less impressed and the spire more evenly sloping than in the other sex; spire slightly less elevated than in N. permunda; aperture with a thick body callus continuous with the umbilical callus; the latter in N. permunda is coiled on the middle of the umbilical wall, with a space between it and the antecedent whorl; in N. alticallosa, the callus fills the upper two-thirds of the umbilicus completely, and sometimes nearly reaches the umbilical carina, which last is less sharply defined than in N. permunda, and consequently the aperture at the base of the pillar is somewhat less angular and effuse than in that species. Altitude of shell 18; maximum diameter 18 millimeters.
The subsutural callus in this species is generally separated from the outer lip at the body by an obscure groove, and the callus here projects forward on the body beyond the lip. The operculum is unknown. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112841. Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Pla. The original figure of Natica alticallosa creates a false impression of the umbilical characters, and therefore a corrected figure has been inserted. As Woodring,17 remarked in 1928, the shell "has a thick pad of callus filling the umbilicus." In the juveniles the pad occupies a smaller area relatively, but the first drawing corresponds in outline and dimensions to the adult among the specimens indicated in Ball's handwriting as the types. The species apparently varies to an unusual degree in the elevation and contour of the spire and in the relative size of the umbilicus and the umblical rib. The forms which have been doubtfully referred to it are all immature. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212C, 2213r, ?2564P, ?3419P, 2211*.
Subgenus NATICARIUS Dumeril
1806. Naticarius Dumeril, Zoologie Analytique, p. 164. 1928. Naticarius Dumeril, Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washing-
ton Pub. 385, p. 378.
Type by monotypy: Nerita canrena Linnaeus. Recent in the West Indies.
The subgenus includes rather large, inflated, lowspired shells. The aperture is semielliptical, the umbilicus rather wide and partially filled by a heavy
17 Woodring, W. P., Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2 : Carnegie Inst. Wash. Pub. 385, p. 378.

funicular rib, which, however, is free from the umbilical wall except along the apertural face. The sculpture is highly characteristic, a retractive wrinkling of the shell directly in front of the posterior suture.
Natica (Naticarius) precursor Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 1, 2, 6
1892. Natica canrena var. plicatella Conrad. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 364 (in part).
Not N. plicatella Conrad, 1863.
Conrad proposed.for the Miocene fossil the name of N. plicatella, which may be used in a varietal sense to cover the older Miocene forms, in which, though the shells are absolutely identical, the operculum differs slightly from that of the newer Miocene, Pliocene, and Recent shells. The latter has about ten channeled, deep grooves, separating as many flattened, subequal ribs, which become narrower and more keeled toward the outer margin of the operculum. The central portion of the latter has an irregular, little-elevated callous area. In the operculum of the variety plicatella, as here restricted, the central callus is more elevated, with its margin limited by a conspicuous groove, while another similar grooye separate the outermost rib from those inside from it. This character may not be constant, but until this is shown it would seem advisable to retain the varietal name, notwithstanding the shells offer no differential characters. We have a somewhat similar case in the recent Fasciolaria princeps of California and F. gigantea Kiener of Florida. The shells cannot be differentiated, but the opercula are markedly unlike. Dall, 1892.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 11.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 10 millimeters.
Figured holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329061. Operculum figured: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 3290'62. From locality 3419, McClelland farm, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. Type locality: ' No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun, Fla. Conrad's species was founded on the shells figured by Emmons and Tuomey and Holmes under the name N. canrena Lamarck. The form developed in the Miocene of the Caroliiias is identical with the Recent N. oanrena both in the characters of the shell and of the operculum, and for that reason Conrad's N. plicatella must be considered as the exact synonym of N. canrena. Natica precursor is consistently smaller than N. canrena and differs in the character of the operculum. In individuals of the same size there are 4 component volutions in N. precursor and only 3% in N. canrena. The nucleus is more depressed in the former, and the umbilical rib more widely separated anteriorly from the umbilical wall. These constant disparities in the shells of N. precursor and N. canrena together with the unlike opercula seem to warrant the specific separation of the two forms, although there is no doubt of their intimate genetic relationship. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 2212C, 7257r, 2213a, 2564a, 3419?, 7151r ; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646C, 9961r ; Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 3742r, 5079r, 3733r, 5618r.

546 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

The group of Natica canrena is widespread in the middle and upper Miocene and Pliocene of the southern United States and the mid-Americas. It is recorded in the Duplin marl and the Waccamaw formation of both North and South Carolina; in the Cancellaria zone of the Choctawhatchee formation and in the Caloosahatchee marl of Florida; in the Miocene beds of Zululum, Mexico, (Engerrand and Urbina, 1910) and of Tehuantepec, Mexico (Bose, 1906 and 1910) ; in the Gatun formation of Costa Eica (Olsson, 1922) and of the Canal Zone (Brown and Pilsbry, 1912, and Olsson, 1922) ; in the Cercado and Gurabo formations of the Dominican Kepublic (Maury, 1917, and Pilsbry, 1922); in Trinidad (Maury, 1925, and Mansfield, 1925) ; in the Bowden beds of Jamaica (Woodring, 1928); and in recent deposits from North Carolina to the West Indies and the Gulf of Mexico.
Subgenus STIG-MAULAX Morch
1852. Stiffmaulax Morch, Catalogus conchyliorum quae reliquit D. Alphonso d'Aguirra et Gadea, Comes de Yoldi, fasc. 1, p. 133.
Type by subsequent designation (Harris, Catalogue of Tertiary Mollusca, British Museum, pt. 1, Australasian, p. 262, 1897) : Natica [Nerita] sulcata Born. Kecent in the West Indies.
The diagnostic features of the subgenus are the high inflation of the whorls; the retractive axial trenching; the wide umbilicus, the anterior portion occupied by a funicular rib separated by a groove from the umbilical wall; and the wide rough and heavy central rib of the semicordate operculum.
The group seems to be peculiarly characteristic of the West Indian Cenozoic faunas.
Natica (Stigmaulax) guppiana Toula
Plate LIX, figure 9
1909. Natica auppiana Toula, K.-k geol. Reichsanstalt Jahrb., Band 58, Heft 4, p. 698 [24], pi. 25 (I), fig. 6.
1910. Natica guppiana Toula?. Engerrand and Urbina, Bol. Soc. Geol., vol. 6, pt. 2, p. 130, pi. 60, figs. 53, 54, 55.
1911. Natica guppyana Toula. Brown and Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 360.
1917. .Natica (Stiff maulax) sulcnta Born? Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 5, No. 29, p. 135 (part).
1922. Natica guppyana Toula. Olsson, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 9, No. 39, p. 156, pi. 13, figs. 13, 14, 15.
1934. Natica sulcata guppyana Toula. Rutsch, Schweizer. paleont. Gesell. Abh., vol. 54, pp. 51, 52.
Shell of moderate size and weight, conspicuously inflated, of a little more than 5 volutions, including the small and ill-differentiated nuclear turns. Whorls of spire evenly convex, increasing in size with moderate rapidity. Body whorl strongly and evenly rounded from the suture to the umbilicus. Surface sculptured with prominent subequal and subequispaced, rounded, retractive sulci, 30 to 40 in number on the body, persistent from suture to suture on the spire, most prom-

inent on the shoulder and tending to evanesce on the final half turn. Suture lines distinct, even a little channeled. Aperture holostomous, semielliptical. Outer lip strongly arcuate, slightly patulous in front. Inner lip feebly oblique. Parietal wall heavily callused from the posterior commissure almost to the umbilicus. Umbilicus open posteriorly, closed anteriorly by a semifnnicular rib, which is cut off from the umbilical wall by a narrow sulcus. Kib irregularly depressed or dimpled in front. Anterior portion of umbilical wall and base of columella reinforced. Operculum not known.
Dimensions of specimen figured by Toula (fide Toula) : Height, 18 millimeters; diameter, 18 millimeters.
Type: Depository not known. Type locality: Cut at Gatun Locks, Panama Canal.
The Engerrand and Urbina figures indicate a shell similar in outline and general sculpture pattern to that figured by Toula, but the axial groovings seem stronger and more persistent on the Zululum specimen. It is possible that this difference may be due to immaturity.
Olsson, 1922, observed that N. guppyana was confined to the mainland of southern Mexico, Costa Kica, and the Canal Zone. He included under N. sulcata the Dominican, Jamaican and Venezuelan races. The Jamaican species is the N. vererugosum of Cossmann, 1924, the Dominican form, the N. sulcata gurabensis Kutsch, 1934, and the Venezuelan race, the N. sulcata beaumonti, also of Kutsch, 1934. The Kutsch separations were made on the character of the axial sculpture, the presence or absence of spiral sculpture and the character of the operculum. Specimens from the Dominican Republic are, however, similar in sculpture pattern to topotypes of N. guppiana. Both the Gatun and Dominican forms are larger than those from Shoal River, the groove behind the funicular rib seems broader, and the dimple on the apertural face of the rib less pronounced. These differences do not, however, seem sufficiently great to demand recognition in the taxonomy. The illustrations of the Venezuelan subspecies reveal no characters by which they may be separated from N. guppiana. The Bowden species, N. vererugosum Cossmann, exhibits a slightly lower spire than that of N. guppiana, the axial grooves are deeper and more numerous, and there is a more or less obvious spiral sculpture.
The presence of Natica guppiana in the Shoal River is another link between that fauna and the Gatun. Natica guppiana like Natica canrena represents a group widely distributed in the mid-Americas in the middle Miocene and persistent within that area to the present time.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 3742C, 5080r, 5184r, 3748r.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

547

Natica (Stigmaulax) guppiana toulana Gardner, n. subsp.

Natica (Tectonatica) mino Gardner, n. sp.

Plate LIX, figures 7, 8
Shell rather heavy. Whorls 4 or 5, increasing rapidly in size; those of the low spire broadly rounded, the body whorl obscurely flattened in front of the suture line, the maximum diameter falling in front of the median horizontal. Surface sculptured with 30 to 35 retractive sulci radiating from the suture, subequal in size and spacing, persistent with diminished strength to the anterior suture on the spire and on the body almost but not quite to the periphery. Spiral sculpture not developed. Suture lines distinct, even a little channeled. Aperture semielliptical. Outer lip thin, sharp, and somewhat asymmetrically arcuate, patulous anteriorly, separated posteriorly from the parietal callus by a shallow groove. Columellar margin slightly oblique, thickened. Body wash heavy from the posterior commissure almost to the umbilicus. Umbilicus semilnnate, open behind, closed in front by a heavy, funicular rib which is cut off anteriorly from the body wall by a narrow sulcus and is irregularly depressed on the anterior portion of its apertural face. Umbilical wall reinforced. Operculum unknown.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 20 millimeters; maximum diameter, 20 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351564. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.
N. guppiana toulana is represented by two individuals only. Though obviously of near kin to the true N. guppiana, they differ in the evanescence of the radial sculpture on the medial portion of the body, the slightly lower spire, and the less strongly and evenly inflated whorls. N. precursor is smaller and the axial sulci less numerous, more feeble and less persistent.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3742r.

Subgenus TECTONATICA Sacco

1890. 1892.

Tectonatica Sacco, I rnolluschi del terreni terziarii del Piernonte e della Liguria, Boll. mus. zool. ed. Anat. comp., vol. 5, no. 86, p. 33.
Cryptonatica, Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 362.

Plate LIX, figures 10, 11
Shell small, obliquely ovate, moderately heavy, of approximately four complete volutions. Conch and protoconch not well differentiated. Initial half turn depressed and largely immersed, the succeeding whorls of the spire well-rounded at the shoulder and increasing in size with moderate rapidity. Shoulder of body obliquely flattened near the aperture. Base strongly and evenly rounded. Surface smooth and polished except for rather faint sulcations radiating across the shoulder from the posterior suture of the later whorls and fading away toward the periphery into normal incremental sculpture. Aperture holostomous, a little more than two-thirds the altitude of the entire shell; inner margin dividing the ellipse of the shell into two subequal parts, the apertural part, a little the smaller of the two; outer lip slightly patulous, thin, sharp, and strongly arcuate, separated posteriorly from the parietal callus by a shallow groove. Inner lip slightly oblique, reinforced anteriorly. Body wall heavily calloused. Outer margin of the wash subparallel to the labium as far as the umbilicus; deposit heaviest at the posterior commissure and the umbilicus. Umbilicus small, filled for the most part with a semifunicular rib separated from the umbilical wall by a chink that increases in width and depth posteriorly and from the parietal wash by a broad but shallow sulcus. Operculum not known.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 6.4 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351571. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. Natica mino suggests N. pusilla Say in size, but the umbilicus of the latter is almost completely closed and the external surface of the shell devoid of sculpture. The incomplete closure of the umbilicus challenges the propriety of referring N. m,ino to the subgenus Tectonatica, but even in N. pusilla the funicle does not occupy the entire umbilical cavity, and in this character the two species differ in degree rather than kind. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856a, 3742r, 5079r, 5618r, 9959P.

Type by subsequent designation (Cossmann, Essais de paldoconchologie compare'e, vol. 13, p. 119, 1924) : Natica tectula Bonelli, Miocene and Pliocene of northern Italy.
The subgenus is characterized by its small size, moderately heavy parietal wash, an umbilicus almost or completely closed by a callus pad, and the smooth calcareous operculum.
The majority of the Recent species referred to Tectonatica inhabit the cooler waters, but the subgenotype is a Mediterranean species.

Natica (Tectonatica) semen Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 17-19
Shell very small, polished, subglobose to stout conical. Whorls approximately 5, the protoconch small, highly polished, much depressed, the two component volutions lying in nearly the same plane. Volutions of conch moderately elevated and increasing rather rapidly in size. Body whorl broadly rounded, the maximum diameter falling in front of the median horizontal. Surface smooth except for rather faint incremental

548 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GKOUP OF FLORIDA

striae. Suture lines closely appressed, not very distinct. Aperture auriculate, broadening anteriorly. Outer lip thin, sharp, arcuate. Columella slightly oblique. Parietal wall heavily washed, the callus separated from the lip by a shallow, ill-defined groove. Umbilicus small, for the most part filled with a semilunar rib of callus which fits closely into the umbilical pit, leaving only a narrow but occasionally deep depression on the convex margin. Umbilical keel evenly rounded, reinforced near its anterior extremity. Operculum small, flat, auriculate, the external surface somewhat thickened along the columellar margin and further strengthened by a deposit of calcite oh the anterior portion of the exterior surface near the columella; inner surface of operculum not known.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 2.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.4 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371876. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. A larger, less perfect individual measures 4.6 millimeters in height and 4.1 millimeters in maximum diameter. Natica semen is one of the most widely distributed of the naticoids in the Alum Bluff fauna. There is no form with which it may be confused. Most of the young of the associated species are stouter with relatively lower spires and have a more or less open umbilicus. The young of N. platabasis are relatively stouter, with lower spires, less numerous whorls, and either smaller umbilical chinks or none at all. Natica semilineata Lea from the Eocene is a much larger shell and the young are relatively stouter than the adult N. semen and the whorls of the spire more rounded and more elevated. Though the species is common at a number of localities, the holotype is the only individual retaining the operculum. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609p, 2212a, 7257r, 2213C, 2564», 3419», 2211C, 7183r ; Oak Grove sand, localities 2646»r, 5632% 5631», 5630r, 5633r, 7054a ; Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 3732r, 5079C, 10661P, 3748»r, 9958», 7261r, 7264C, 9960», 5618r, 9959P.
Natica (Tectonatica?) platabasis Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 23, 24
1892. Natica (Cryptonatica) floriaana Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 366 (in part).
1915. Natica (Cryptonatica) floridana Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 106 (part).
Shell large for the subgenus, rather heavy, subconical. Whorls approximately 4 in number, 3% in the holotype. Protoconch of 1% turns, smooth, highly polished, and immersed except for the flattened posterior surface. Initiation of conch marked by the more por-

cellanous texture and the development of incremental striations. Whorls of conch increasing rapidly in size, somewhat obliquely coiled so that toward the aperture a progressively larger part of the whorl is exposed; whorls obliquely flattened in front of the posterior suture; the body obtusely carinated at the periphery. Base more or less flattened between the peripheral and umbilical keels. Surface incrementally striated. Aperture auriculate, broader anteriorly. Outer lip asymmetrically rounded, expanding in front. Columellar margin slightly oblique. Parietal wash very heavy, cut off from the labrum by a shallow sulcus, thickening toward the umbilicus, which, in the adult, it nearly or entirely fills, leaving at most only a narrow chink along the anterior surface. Umbilical keel obtuse, concealed in its posterior extent by the callus; a sickle-shaped area exposed in front, the broader surface at the apertural face.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 12.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 11.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371875. Type locality: No. 2564, McClelland farm, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Natica platabasis was included by Dall under N. floridana Dall. The type of his species came from the Ballast Point silex beds and is a smaller, more globose form, with little or no trace of either a basal or an umbilical carina. The very young of the Chipola species are equally rounded, but they have a flattened spire. The suture line at the aperture of N. platabasis drops forward a little more than it does in N. floridana, but the spire is distinctly higher in the. adult of the latter than in the young of the former. Dall noted the wide difference in outline in his floridana, and considered it as a sexual variation, but in several hundred individuals examined from the Chipola all of the adults are more or less obtusely angulated at the periphery and flattened on the base, while none of the forms examined from Ballast Point show any trace of the development of either a peripheral or umbilical angulation. The species is common in the Chipola formation in the vicinity of Baileys Ferry and far from rare in the lower bed at Alum Bluff. It has not been collected at the higher horizons. The dimensions of N. platabasis exceed those of typical Tectonatica. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 2212C, 2213C, 2564C, 3419C, 2211C, 7183C.
Genus FOLINICES Montfort
1810. Polinices Denys de Montfort, Conchyliologie systSmatique, vol. 2, p. 222.
Type by original designation: Polinices albus Montfort = Natica mammillaris Lamarck = Natica brunnea Link. Recent in the West Indies.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

549

Woodring18 has clarified the obscurity in the type designation as follows:
Montfort cites 'nerita mamilla Linn.' in the synonymy of Polinices albus, but his figure, which represents the type of the genus, shows the West Indian shell generally known as Natica mammillaris Lamarck, for which the earliest name seems to be Natica brunnea Link. In the oriental "Nerita" mammilla Linne the umbilicus is filled with callus.
The shell characters of Polinices are similar to those of Natica; however, the operculum of Polinices is corneous, and that of Natica is calcareous.
The shell is of medium size, ovate, including a few closely wound whorls appressed at the suture. The aperture is semiovate, the parietal callus heavy and indented near the upper margin of the umbilicus. » The genus, though of later origin than Natica, is more abundantly represented in the middle and late Tertiary beds and in the east coast waters of today and constitutes, indeed, one of the more conspicuous elements of the univalve faunas of eastern North America.
Polinices judsoni (Maury)
Plate LIX, figures 15, 16
1910. Natfaa Judsoni Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 29, pi. 7, fig. 6.
Shell smooth and polished, small, with four sloping whorls; suture distinct; lines of growth conspicuous but not forming wrinkles; callus heavy especially on the body, but not extending over the profound sink. Length of shell 18; greatest width 13 millimeters.
Named in honor of Dr. Judson, of Dobbs Ferry, New York. Oak Grove, Santa Rosa County, Florida. Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
Shell highly polished, rather small and slender for the genus, ovoid. Aperture approximately two-thirds the total altitude of the shell. Protoconch small, obtuse, the 2% component volutions feebly inflated, symmetrically coiled, and nearly uniform in diameter. Whorls of conch 3 to 4, closely appressed, somewhat obliquely coiled; the later turns bulging a little behind the suture. Body whorl obscurely flattened in front of the suture, broadly rounded at the periphery. Surface smooth and lustrous, brownish in color, with occasional streaks of yellowish tan that may indicate the original color pattern. Whorls closely appressed, the suture line distinct, dropping forward a little near the aperture. Aperture rather narrow for the genus, auriculate. Outer lip thin, sharp, the maximum expansion only a little below the median horizontal; separated posteriorly from the parietal callus by an ill-defined sulcus. Inner lip approximately vertical except for a slight bulge at the umbilical margin, reinforced in all but the extreme anterior portion. Enamel thickly deposited on the body wall at the posterior commissure, continued forward and partially roofing the umbilical cavity. Incipient umbilical rib present but rarely de-
18 Woodring, W. P. Miocene Mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica: Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 385.

veloped. Umbilical carina obtuse, elongated, margining a funicular cavity which is striate within.
Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 18.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 13.5 millimeters.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351575. Locality of figured specimen No. 3856, 6 miles westnorthwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla. The young are relatively not so high and much stouter than the adults and the umbilical pit is a mere chink. About a dozen rather battered individuals collected at the old millrace at Sommerville, 1 mile east of Argyle Station, Walton County, are tentatively referred to P. judsoni, although the differences may prove to be of at least subspecific value. They are decidedly stouter than the type abundant at Shell Bluff, and the umbilical rib is thickened at the margin of the aperture so that it half fills the umbilical cavity. Polinices judsoni represents still another group of naticoids widespread in the Tertiary of the mid-Americas and existent to the present day. The Gatun species, Polinices canalizonalis (Brown and Pilsbry, 1913) is more inflated, with a much wider umbilicus limited by a less obscure umbilical keel and a shallow but well defined sulcus cutting across the anterior part of the parietal callus. Polinices stanislas-meunieri Maury from the Cercado formation of the Dominican Republic and Polinices (Dallitesta) coensis (Dall) from the Oancellaria zone of the Choctawhatchee formation of Florida are also more inflated than P. judsoni and faintly sculptured spirally. Polinices subcloMsa (Sowerby), considered by Woodring as no more than a subspecies of the Recent P. T)runnea Link, is larger than P. judsoni, more widely umbilicate, and the aperture is slightly wider and more oblique. The Sowerby species occurs both in the Cercado and Gurabo formations of the Dominican Republic, but more commonly in the Cercado; it occurs also in the Gatun formation of the Canal Zone and of Costa Rica, the Bowden beds of Jamaica and, according to Brown and Pilsbry, 1917, in the Miocene of Colombia. The Kecent species P. brunnea, probably in the line of descent from the P. judsoni stock and ranging along both the east and west coasts of Florida, in the Gulf of Mexico, and in the West Indies, is relatively large and widely umbilicate. The dimple or groove which separates the parietal callus from the callus that roofs the anterior portion of the umbilical opening seems to be characteristic of the group. The species is by far the most prolific in the Shoal River sands. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646% 5632», 5630r, 7054r, 2652r, 7055r, 10659?, Cornell University collection; Shoal Kiver formation, localities 3856pr, 3732P, 3742Pr, 3731», 10658?, 5184C, 5195r, ?5079r, ?223'8r, ?3748r, 7264r, 5618r, 9959».

550 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Polinices? demicryptus Gardner, n. sp.

Polinices robustus Gardner, n. sp.

Plate LIX, figures 20, 21

Plate LIX, figures 5, 14

1892. Polinices (Lunatia) hemicryptus Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 371 (in part).
Not Nat-ica hemicrypta Gabb, 1860.
Not Natica hemicrypta Conrad, 1868.
Shell small, highly polished, rather slender for the genus. Whorls 4% including the turn and a half of the protoconch, which is vitreous, small and flattened, the initial half turn almost entirely immersed. Whorls of conch increasing rapidly in size, wound somewhat obliquely so that the position of the suture line becomes more and more anterior toward the aperture. Body whorl somewhat obliquely flattened in front of the suture, smoothly rounded medially. Surface smooth except for incremental striae, which are most obvious posteriorly. Whorls closely appressed but the sutures distinct. Aperture semielliptical, slightly patulous, anteriorly. Outer lip arcuate, somewhat flattened posteriorly and more strongly rounded anteriorly. Columellar margin oblique. Parietal wash heavily deposited from the labrum to the umbilical area, the callus partially cut off from the margin of the labrum by a surflcial sulcus. Umbilicus roughly crescentic, overhung posteriorly by the parietal wash. Parietal callus commonly cut off from umbilical callus by a surflcial groove. Umbilical rib low, broad, evanescent in front, filling a little less than half of the umbilical pit. Outer margin of the umbilicus abruptly rounded but not angulated. Interior striations rather deep. Margin of aperture reinforced directly in front of the umbilical area.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 7.5 millimeters; maximum .diameter, 6.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112926.
Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.

Shell large, heavy, coiled between 6 and 7 times. Apex of the unique type somewhat decorticated and unclear characters indeterminate. Aperture less than two-thirds the total height. Early whorls feebly but evenly convex, increasing in size with moderate rapidity. Later turns more elevated and closely appressed, obliquely flattened behind; the maximum diameter falling a little in front of the median horizontal. Surface sculptured only with faint incremental striatious, least faint posteriorly. Sutures closely appressed, distinct but inconspicuous. Aperture relatively narrow; the outer margin imperfect. Columella oblique. Parietal wall heavily padded from the posterior commissure to* the umbilical pit, which is overhung by the callus. Umbilicus relatively small, elongate, partially filled with a broad but little elevated umbilical rib, strongest along the medial portion of the columellar margin. Umbilical keel obtuse, feebly reinforced anteriorly.
Dimensions of holotype: Height 39± millimeters; diameter (outer lip lost), 29± millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351586.
Type locality: No. 5184, first ravine below Shell Bluff, Shoal Eiver, Walton County, Fla.
P. robustus suggests a giant P. judsoni, but, aside from its being more than double the size of the latter, the whorls of the spire are more numerous and more inflated.
Polinices caparonus Maury from the Manzanilla formation of Trinidad is a species comparable in outline and dimensions, but in P. caparonus the area in front of the suture is more depressed and the posterior and medial portions of the umbilicus are filled with callus united along a sinuous margin with the heavy parietal callus.
The type is unique.

Polinices ? demicryptus n. sp. has been confused with Euspira hemicrypta (Gabb) from the lower Miocene of New Jersey. It is separable by the heavier shell, the lower spire, the less inflated body, and by the low umbilical rib. The relatively heavy shell, the obliquely compressed outline, and the development of a funicle seem to exclude this species from Euspira.

Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 5184r.
Subgenus NEVERITA Risso 1826. Neverita Risso, Histoire naturelle de 1'Europe meri-
dionale, vol. 4, p. 149.
Type by monotypy: Neverita Josephinia Risso.

Polinices ? demicryptus has much in common with the youthful P. judsoni from the later horizons of the Alum Bluff group, and may be an undersize representative of that group in the Chipola formation. It is a larger species, however, than N. semen Lea and has a less elevated, less rounded spire.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 2212a, 3419r, 7151P.

Shell of moderate dimensions, depressed, suborbicular. Spire very low, broadly conical or flattened. Aperture more or less oblique. Umbilicus large, partially filled, the padded extremity of the funicle continuous with the parietal callus. Operculum corneous.
The group is much more depressed than Polinices sensu stricto. For the most part, it is confined to the temperate waters.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

551

Polinices (Neverita) chipolanus Dall
Plate LIX, figure 22
1892. Potynices (Neverita) chipolanus Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 368.
Most of them from the Chipola beds exhibit rounded whorls, an excavated, spirally striated umbilicus only half filled by the callus, which has its surface divided by a deep transverse sulcus. It is difficult to decide whether this form should be assigned, as a variety chipolana, to the Eocene gibbosa or to the Miocene duplicata, or whether it should be regarded as a distinct species from either. In any case it is an almost exactly intermediate form between them. It reaches an altitude and diameter of 29 millimeters and has been obtained from the lower bed at Alum Bluff and the Old Miocene of the Chipola River. Dall, 1892.
Dimensions of holotype: Height 21.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 22 millimeters.
Type: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112870. Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile West of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. Shell polished, moderately large, depressed. Spire very low, almost entirely concealed by the body whorl. Nucleus small, highly polished, flattened, of 1^ volutions. Conch coiled a little more than four times. Surface smooth except for faint incremental striations near the suture. Sutures closely appressed, distinct. Aperture ovate, widening anteriorly. Columellar lip nearly vertical. Parietal wall thickly callused, the deposit most heavy in the umbilical region and at the posterior commissure, where it is separated from the outer lip by a shallow groove. Posterior part of umbilical pit veiled by a linguiform extension of the parietal callus, which unites with the heavy umbilical rib; a surficial sulcus indicating the line of division between the two. Umbilicus spirally striate within. Umbilical keel obtuse, reinforced anteriorly. No other species combines the depressed contour with the partial filling of the umbilical pit. The somewhat similar Neverita cuspidata (Guppy), from the Springvale horizon in Trinidad, is larger and the callus is more extensive. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 2212Pr, 2213Pr, 2564P, 3419?, 7151r, 2211a , 7183?; Oak Grove sand, localities 2646P, 5632r, 7054r, 7055r, 9961r ; Shoal Eiver formation, 5195r, 5079C, 10 61r, ?5193r, 9959 r .
Polinices (Neverita) eucallosus Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 29, 30
Shell moderately large, low, turbinate. Whorls 5 or 6, closely appressed, rapidly enlarging, those of the spire very low and partially concealed by the embracing body whorl. Periphery of body evenly rounded. Surface smooth except for incremental striations, which are least feeble near the posterior suture and in the umbilical region. Suture lines distinct, a little im-

pressed. Aperture large, slightly patulous anteriorly, auriculate in the adults, semielliptical in the young. Outer lip thin and sharp, strongly but asymmetrically arcuate, overlapping the inner posteriorly and cut off from the parietal callus by a shallow groove. Columella feebly concave. Body wash heavy, particularly at the posterior commissure; the margin of the enamel slightly contracted about halfway between the suture and the umbilicus. Umbilical cavity completely filled with a flat, closely fitting pad.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 24.7 millimeters; maximum diameter, 26.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350487. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. P. eucallosus may be an antecedent of P. duplicatus (Say), but the differences between the two forms are much more marked in the immature stages than in the adult. The young of the species from the Alum Bluff are shaped like little round biscuits, the maximum diameter falling near the median horizontal, and the entire umbilical depression is evenly padded with callus. In the young of P. duplicatus, on the other hand, the outline is higher relatively and more or less turbinate, and the process of filling the umbilical cavity incomplete. P. eucallosus is best represented at Shoal River, though it is far from rare in the Oak Grove sands. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 3386P, 3385C, 7148a, 2646P r, 5632r, 5631r, 5633r 7054P; 10659?; Shoal River formation, localities 3856C, 3742C, 3731C, 10658P, 5184P, 5079C, 10661P, 3733P, 2238C, 3748a, 9958P, 7264r.
Genus EUSPIRA Agassiz
1838. Euspira Agassiz in Sowerby, Mineral conchology, German ed.. pp. 14, 320 (fide Sherborn).
1919. Labellinacca Cossmann and Peyrot, Conchologie n6og6nique de 1'Aquitaine, vol. 3, p. 392. Type by monotypy: Natica labellata Lamarck. Eocene of the Paris Basin.
1925. Labellinacca Cossmann, Essais de pa!6oconchologie com- paree, vol. 13, p. 137.
Type by subsequent designation (Bucquoy, Dautzenberg, and Dollfus, Mollusques marins du Roussillon, vol. 1, fasc. 4, p. 143, 1883) : Natica glaucinoides Sowerby. London clay of England.
Cossmann discarded Euspira and created Ltibellinacca,, in the first place, possibly, because he was not aware of the earlier name. Later, in 1925 (op. cit., p. 50), he gave as his reason, Herrmannsen's citation in 184819 of Euspira as a synonym of Globularia. Herrmannsen, however, designated no type, so that the name is not invalidated fey the mere citation as a synonym. Stewart in 192720, stated that two species were
18 Herrnmnnsen, A. N., Indicis generurn rnalacozoorurn, Primordia, vol. 1, p. 436, 1847.
20 Stewart, K. B., Gabbs' California fossil type gastropods, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 78. p. 324, 1927.

552 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

mentioned in the original description of Euspira, which I have not seen Natica glaucinoides Sowerby, later designated as the type, and Natica depressa Lamarck? Sowerby, which is referred to Ampullina.
Euspira is commonly given place under Lunatia Gray, 1847. The monotype of Lunatia is Natica ampullarwi Lamarck, a species broadly described as a large, thin, inflated shell with an open umbilicus, unfigured, with no reference to a published figure, and from an unknown habitat. It is supposed that Lamarck had before him the British species, Natica catena da Costa, but its identity with N. ampullaria heros was suggested by Tryon. Euspira differs most obviously from the common concept of Lunatia in the smaller size. The character of the operculum of the fossil species is, however, unknown, and the group has been isolated.
Euspira is characterized by a rather thin shell, globose outline, and small umbilicus. The internal umbilical rib is little or not at all developed. The pillar callus is much reduced and may be absent. The majority of the Eecent species are temperate or boreal.

the axial sulcations identified with that species, and unlike the latter the umbilicus is free from callus except for a posterior marginal thickening.
Polinices (Euspira) propeinternus Mansfield, from the Area zone of the Choctawhatchee formation of Florida, is slightly larger than E. rotunda and the spire is much higher. The whorls are more numerous by almost a complete volution and increase less rapidly in diameter. No umbilical rib is developed in either species, but the entering, ascending groove in P. propeinternus suggests such a character. The relationship between the two species is probably close.
Natica subinterna Bose, 1910, from Tehuantepec, seems also to be related, but in the characters of the umbilicus the resemblance to P. propeinternus is closer than it is to E. rotunda.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, localities 3856p, 3742r, 9959r.
Subfamily SININAE
Genus SINUM "Bolten" Eoeding

Euspira rotunda Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 25, 26, 27
Shell rather small, polished. Aperture a little more than two-thirds the total height of the shell. Whorls 3 to 4, strongly and evenly inflated. Protoconch small, highly polished, depressed, of approximately 1% volutions, the initial half turn largely immersed, the succeeding whorl more elevated. Conch differentiated from protoconch by the less lustrous surface and the presence of incremental striations. Whorls of spire regularly increasing in size, broadly and symmetrically convex. Body whorl strongly and evenly rounded, its maximum diameter at the median horizontal. Surface smooth except for incrementals, which are least feeble near the posterior suture. Suture lines distinct, impressed. Aperture semielliptical or auriculate, slightly wider anteriorly, the outer lip convex, the inner oblique. Parietal wall washed with callus from the labrum to the umbilicus, the deposit slightly heavier near the posterior commissure and cut off from the outer lip by a shallow, ill-defined sulcus. Umbilicus rather small, semi-lunar, striated within, partially obscured by a thickening of the posterior portion of the columellar wall. Umbilical keel obtuse, reinforced anteriorly.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 9.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 9.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351597. Paratype (juvenile) : U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497119.
Type locality: No. 3856, 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.
Euspira rotunda is characterized by the even rotundity of its whorls. In general contour it suggests a young Natica guppmna Toula, but it shows no trace of

1798. ftinutu "Bolten" Roeding, Museum Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 14.
=Sigaretus Lamarck, Prodrome d'une nouvelle classification des coquilles: Soc. histoire nat. Paris M6m., p. 77, 1799.
1909. Sinum Bolten. Ball, U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 59, p. 91.
Type by subsequent designation (Ball, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 109,1915) : Helix haliotoidea [Gmelin in Eoeding] Linnaeus.
Shell depressed, auriform. Protoconch smooth, paucispiral. Spire lateral, very low, with rapidly widening whorls. Sculpture delicate, spiral or reticulate. Aperture very large, oblique, dilated. Outer lip thin, sharp, retractive. Inner apertural margin concave. Parietal wall calloused. Umbilicus narrowly perforate or imperforate.
The genus, though never abundant, is fairly well represented in the Tertiary and Quaternary beds. The Eecent species live on the mud and sand flats bordering the warm seas. . The species of Sinum are local in their distribution. 8inum chipolanum, is known from only a single locality outside the type horizon. Sinum dodoneum is restricted to the Oak Grove sand, and it is far from common even at the two localities at which it has been collected. Sinum waltonense, is abundant at the horizon which it characterizes, although no trace of it has been found elsewhere. Apical surface more or less elevated:
Diameter of adult shell, exceeding 20 millimeters; base of adult more or less flattened. . . .Siniim chipolanum Dall.
Diameter of adult shell not exceeding 20 millimeters; base of adult smoothly rounded ................. .......... Sinum waltonense Gardner, n. sp.
Apical surface depressed ... Sinum dodoneum Gardner, n. sp.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

553

Sinum chipolanum Dall
Plate LIX, figures 31, 32
1892. Sigaretus chipolanus Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 379 (in part) ; not pi. 17, fig. 7.
1915. Sinum chipolanum Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 109 (in part) ; not pi. 12, fig. 29, pi. 16, fig. 1.
Shell solid, rather thick, varying in rotundity with age, the young ones as a rule being'more naticoid in shape, while the more advanced are relatively flatter, and the fully mature specimens again are more rotund; whorls four or five, sculptured with rather fine, flattish, revolving threads of varying size, separated by channeled interspaces, varying in width and minutely undulated or reticulated by the sharp, close-set, fine incremental lines; aperture large, oblique; base somewhat flattened, periphery rounded; pillar-lip arched, broad, flattened somewhat and sometimes excavated, with a narrow sulcus behind it, running up to the imperforate umbilical region; callus on the body moderate, lip not reflected. Max. Ion. of adult 33; diam. 27 mm.; Ion. of young shell 16.5; axial elevation 11; diam. 15 mm.
This species is most nearly related to /S. declivis, from which it may be separated by its closed umbilicus and the absence of the emargination of the pillar, which is the most characteristic feature of 8. declivis. It also recalls 8. bilix var. mtississippiensis, which has a perforate umbilicus and is more rotund. The specimen figured is from the silex beds; the much larger and more characteristic specimens from Chipola were only obtained later. The sculpture may be close or sparse; it varies in this respect in nearly all the species. Dall, 1892.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 31 millimeters; maximum diameter, 31 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112967.
Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
The Ballast Point forms are more evenly inflated, the aperture relatively smaller, and the umbilicus more open than those from Chipola. The outline of the adult is fairly constant but the adolescent individuals vary widely in the degree of flattening behind the periphery and the consequent relative proportions.
Sinum gabM (Brown and Pilsbry) from the Gatun formation of the Isthmus of Panama is also more evenly inflated, the whorls more numerous and less rapidly enlarging.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 7893r, 2212?, 2213C, 2564C, 3419?, 7151?; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646C.
Sinum waltonense Gardner, *n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 33?, 34?, 35, 36, 38
Shell very thin, fragile, transversely ovate. Spire relatively small and low, the body whorl very large and strongly inflated; maximum diameter falling in front of the median horizontal, the body obliquely flattening behind but strongly and smoothly rounded in front. Volutions of conch 2 and a fraction, of the protoconch 2y2 . Surface of protoconch smooth and highly

polished; the initial half turn largely immersed, the succeeding volutions somewhat rounded but not elevated, increasing in size regularly but not rapidly; separated by deeply impressed sutures. Beginning of conch indicated by a shallow sulcus, the flattening of the conchal surface, and the abrupt initiation of the spiral sculpture. Whorls of conch broadly convex, increasing rapidly in diameter. Surface sculptured with submicroscopically fine and crowded lirae, minutely crinkled by the incrementals, tending to alternate but more or less irregular, numbering approximately 5 primaries to the millimeter on the body and more than that on the final whorl of the spire. Suture lines feebly impressed. Aperture rudely semielliptical, patulous anteriorly. Outer lip thin, sharp, very much expanded. Columellar wall cutting oval of the basal outline into two unequal parts, of which the apertural is the larger. Inner margin of aperture sinuous. Parietal wall thinly glazed. Inner lip thickened and reflected over the narrow umblical chink. A very small part of the umbilical area exposed and differentiated by the absence of the spiral sculpture that covers the rest of the conch.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 15.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 13.5 millimeters.
Holotype and juvenile topotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371887.
Locality of holotype and juvenile topotype: No. 3856, 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, sec. 6, T. 3 N., R. 21 W., Walton County, Fla.
A very large adult from Whites Creek (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498393, figs. 33, 34) is doubtfully referred to Sinum waltonense. It includes almost 3 volutions and measures 27 millimeters both in height and diameter, almost double the size of the usual specimens from Shoal River. The body of the specimen from Whites Creek, unlike that of typical $. waltonense, is obtusely shouldered and obliquely flattened laterally. The differences may be due to unusual age. The character of the sculpture is similar in the two forms and the seemingly more expanded and patulous aperture of the larger individual is exaggerated by the pose of the specimens. Unfortunately, a uniform scale was not used in the illustrations.
Sinum waltonense is rarely so large as S. chipolanum Dall, is more rounded and more finely sculptured. In S. nolani Maury from the Gurabo formation of the Dominican Republic, the aperture, judging by the illustration, is less patulous and the shell much broader relatively. S carolanum Spieker from the lower Zorritos formation in Peru is a species of similar aspect but less trapezoidal when viewed from the rear. S. naticoidale Vokes from the upper Miocene of Springvale, Trinidad, is a more chunky shell with a less patulous aperture. $. waltonense is restricted in its distribution to the Shoal River, but it is very abundant

554 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

within that limited area. No other Sinum has been recognized from the horizon.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, localities 3856a, 3732r, 3742C, 3731P, 5184P, 5195r, 3733r, 2238?, 3748C, 14436P.
Sinum dodoneum Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 37, 39
Shell depressed, auriculate. Apical surface flattened, rudely semielliptical; the margin of the outer lip approximately straight, the periphery of the body strongly arcuate. Nucleus small, smooth, highly polished, naticoid, coiled 3 times; the initial turn flattened on the apical surface, the succeeding volutions moderately inflated and separated by deeply impressed sutures. True conch of less than two full turns. Line between conch and protoconch marked by a slight jog due to greater depression of the surface of the protoconch and by the abrupt establishment of the spiral sculpture. Spirals on final whorl of spire in type approximately 9 near their origin, but their number almost doubles before the end of the whorl. Body sculpture of low, flattened fillets, subequal in size and spacing; occasional secondaries intercalated near the suture, more or less minutely nodulated by the incrementals and growth lines, numbering between 2 and 3 to the millimeter at the aperture but more than that away from it and becoming increasingly finer and more crowded toward the .periphery and microscopically fine and more or less obsolete toward the umbilicus. Periphery of body whorl sharply but smoothly rounded. Aperture occupying in the type more than two-thirds of the basal surface. Outer lip thin, sharp, its maximum expansion a little in front of the median horizontal. Inner margin obliquely arcuate. Parietal wall thinly glazed. Inner lip reflected over the umbilical opening and continuous with the body wash. Margin feebly reinforced in front of the umbilicus.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 7 millimeters; maximum diameter, 23 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 16 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136075. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow Kiver, Okaloosa County, Fla.
Sinun dodoneum is by far the most depressed of any of the Alum Bluff species that have been described. In general outline the type suggests S. perspectivum of the post-Pliocene and Eecent faunas but differs from it in the more depressed nuclear turns, the more uniform sculpture on the apical surface, and the persistence of the spirals on the base. It also suggests S. multiplicatum Dall of the Pliocene of the Carolinas and Florida, but apparently the Miocene form has a greater number of protoconchal and a lesser number of conchal turns than the Pliocene species. The latter is decidedly

more elevated than the type of the former, but 8. dodoneum may vary widely in outline and relative proportions. The species was described from the only perfect individual collected. Fragments of broken and worn individuals indicate that the type is not fully grown, and that it is more depressed than the normal adult. One imperfect individual collected attained a height of almost 20 millimeters and a diameter of probably 45 millimeters.
The species is rare even at the single horizon at which it is represented.
Sinum gatunense (Toula) is smaller than 8. dodoneum, even more depressed, and more nearly ellipsoidal in outline.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, 2646?, 5632r.
Genus SIGATICA Meyer and Aldrich
1886. Sigatica Meyer and Aldrich, Cincinnati Soc. Nat. History Jour., vol. 9, no. 2, p. 42.
Type by monotypy: Sigaretus (Sigatica) Boettgeri Meyer and Aldrich. Lower Claiborne of Mississippi and Alabama.
Shell small, depressed naticifprm. Aperture semielliptical, moderately wide. Outer lip thin, sharply rounded posteriorly, expanded, slightly patulous anteriorly. Inner lip adnate to the body posteriorly, free medially and forming the inner wall of the wide umbilical funnel. Sculpture in genotype restricted to a few spiral grooves in front of the suture and surrounding and entering the umbilicus.
Eunaticina, with which Sigatica has been commonly confused, is little more than a rather strongly sculptured, widely umbilicate Sinum, with an incipient funicle. The genotype is Natica papilla Gmelin from the western Pacific. Sigatica is a compact group of a few species, most of them rare and recorded only from the Tertiary and Kecent faunas of the Gulf Province and the West Indies.
Section GLYPTANATICA Gardner, new section
Type by original designation: Sigatica euglypta Gardner, n. sp.
Shell relatively large for the group and not conspicuously thin. Eoughly naticiform but narrowly tabulated in fronfr of the suture. Spirals well trenched, evenly and not very closely spaced. Aperture obovate, moderately wide, obtusely angulated behind, broadly rounded and somewhat patulous in front. Inner lip adnate to the body, constricted at the base of the body and forming the inner wall of the moderately wide umbilical funnel; umbilical rib suggested by slightly insinuated inner lip. Base of body rounding smoothly into the umbilicus; only the marginal spirals entering it.

CTBNOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

555

Glyptanatica includes the larger, more strongly sculptured members of Sigatica. Like Sigatica s.s., to which it is very closely related, it is a warm-water western Atlantic group.
Sigatica euglypta Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LX, figures 1, 5
Shell large, moderately thin, inflated, ovate-conic. Aperture approximately two-thirds the height of the shell. Whorls of conch Sy2 in the holotype, narrowly tabulated posteriorly, broadly convex, increasing rapidly in diameter. Body obliquely flattened behind, rounding smoothly but rather abruptly into the base. Sutures distinct, channeled toward the aperture. Protoconch low, small, smooth, highly polished, coiled 2y2 times. Initial turn minute and largely immersed in the succeeding volution; remaining turn and a half increasing rather rapidly in diameter but slowly in height. Opening of conch marked by a slight change in the texture of the shell and by the appearance of faint spirals. Axial sculpture restricted to incrementals; sharp, regular and retractive on the shoulder and in the spiral grooves on the posterior part of the shell; sharp and crowded, too, in the umbilical funnel but obsolete on the medial part of the whorl. Spiral sculpture incised; sulci angular, rather deep, linear, not quite so narrow posteriorly, 5 on the whorls of the spire, 18 on the body, equispaced except on the base of the body, where they are more crowded. Basal sulci wider and deeper than those behind them; in many individuals 2 or 3 obscure lirations developed in the umbilical funnel. Aperture lobate, acutely angulated posteriorly, patulous and smoothly rounded anteriorly. Outer lip thin, sharp, broadly and asymmetrically arcuate. Inner lip oblique to the axis; callus dense on the body wall but not very thick, feebly constricted along the anterior part of the umbilical funnel. Umbilicus narrow but deep; funnel well rounded at the base of the whorl, almost vertical along the dextral wall, sharply striated by the incrementals.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 19.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 16.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371886. Type locality: No. 7893, Boynton Landing, Choctawhatchee Eiver, Washington County, Fla. Sigatica caractica (Ball) is only about one-third the size of 8. euglypta and is much more finely sculptured. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 7893r.
Sigatica caractica (Dall)
Plate LX, figure 2
1900. Eunaticina, caract icus Dall. Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 5, pi. 42, fig. 6 (no description).
Shell polished, small, solid, globose; the whorls of the low spire narrowly tabulated, broadly and feebly
695462 47 5

convex; the body more inflated toward the base than directly in front of the suture. Whorls of conch 2%, the^protoconch a little more than twice coiled. Initial quarter turn largely submerged, the succeeding volutions well rounded but not elevated, separated from one another by impressed sutures. Beginning of conch marked by the initiation of the spiral sculpture. Spirals appearing as incised linear sulci, approximately 9 on the initial whorl of the conch and, in the type, about 30 on the body, uniform for the most part but somewhat wider and deeper near the suture and the umbilical area; rendered more or less irregular by the incremental sculpture. Sutural channel closely striated by the growth lines and threaded near the outer margin with a single fine lira. Aperture lobate, somewhat patulous anteriorly. Outer lip ample, broadly and asymmetrically arcuate. Inner lip oblique; glazing the base of the body, reverted slightly over the umbilical pit and forming its ventral wall; feebly insinuated, indicating an incipient umbilical rib. Umbilicus de^ep but not very wide, striated within by incrementals only but spirally threaded near the outer margin at the periphery.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 107379. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow Biver, Okaloosa County, Fla. The species varies within rather narrow limits in the number and spacing of the spirals, especially near the umbilicus. Sigatica euglypta is almost three times as large as S. caractica but with not much more than half as many spirals. The Eecent southern east coast and West Indian Sigatica carolinensis (Dall) has a smaller thinner shell with less pronounced posterior tabulation. The species is rather common at the type locality and the type horizon and occurs, though very rarely, in the Chipola and Shoal Eiver formations as well. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2564r ; Oak Grove sand, localities 2646C, 5632», 5633r, 7054r ; Shoal Eiver formation, 3742r.
Subfamily AMPULLHTAE
Genus GLOBULAEIA Swainson
1840. Globularia Swainson, Treatise on malacology, p. 345. =Ampullina auctores.
1927 (January). Globularia Stewart, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 78, p. 330.
1927 (September). Globularia Cox, Rept. on Paleontology, Zanzibar Protectorate, p. 20.
Type by subsequent designation (Herrmannsen, Indicis generum malacozoorum, vol. 1, p. 480, 1847) : Natica sigaretina Lamarck. Eocene of the Paris Basin.
Shell moderately large, thin, globose. Whorls more numerous than in Natica, highly inflated, flattening a

556 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

little in front of the suture, rapidly increasing in diameter. Surface smooth except for incrementals. Aperture wide, auriculate, angulated posteriorly, much expanded and produced anteriorly. Outer lip thin and sharp. Inner lip sigmoidal following the contour of the body and of the excavated pillar. Parietal wash continuous with the pillar callus. Umbilicus open in the young, the funnel glazed; the elevated outer margin of the glaze marking the umbilical periphery and couftrasting with the lower luster of the body wall, partially fused in the adult with the less highly polished callus that reinforces the slightly reverted inner lip and closes the umbilicus.
The first established record of the Latinized AmpulUna is that by Bowdich.21 He badly figured an unnamed species that has been commonly identified as Ampullaria depressa Lamarck, from the Eocene of the Paris Basin. Stewart in January, 1927, rejected Ainpullina as a doubtful name. The relationships between the Tertiary groups seem more clear, however, if Ampullina is retained for the relatively heavy, nonchanneled umbilicate ampullinids of the Paris Basin, which are closely related to Ampullinopsis Conrad of the Eocene and Oligocene Gulf faunas.
Ampullina s.s., according to Stewart,22 is restricted to the Eocene, Ampullinopsis to the Oligocene and lower Miocene, while Globularia is widely though not abundantly recorded in the Eocene, Oligocene, and Miocene and is represented in the Kecent fauna of the western Pacific by Cernina fluctuata (Sowerby).
Globularia flscheri (Da11)
Plate LIX, figure 28
1892. Ampullina flscheri Ball, Wagner Free Inst. Sei. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 374, pi. 22, fig. 36.
1927. Globularia fischeri (Dall). Stewart, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 78, p. 331.
Shell closely related to Ampullina sigaretina of the Parisian Eocene, from which it differs by its somewhat more depressed spire, less impressed suture, wider basal fascicle, and by the thick, complete coat of callus,-'Which in the adult covers completely the fasciole and umbilicus, as in Cernina fluctuosa. The shell is also slightly less expanded and rounded than the European fossil. It has a low but pointed spire, six or seven whorls, smooth surface with impressed incremental lines, slightly flattened callus, and in front of the suture the whorl is flattish instead of rounded, as in A. sigaretina. A shell of six whorls measures 33 mm. high and 38 mm. in maximum diameter, but I have fragments which measure over 60 mm. in diameter.
This form was at first regarded by me as being merely a mutation of A. streptostoma, but of more than twenty-five specimens from various localities which were in a state to show the base, not a single one has an open umbilicus, while all the Ballast Point aud Claibornian specimens have the umbilicus open. The young of both are not separable. It may even-
'"Bowdich, T. B., Elements of conchology, pt. 1, p. 31, 1822. 32 Stewart, K. B., Gabb's California Cretaceous and Tertiary type lamellibranchs : Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Spec. Pub. 3, p. 40, 1930.

tually prove to be a local race of A. streptostoma, but at present would seem better kept apart.
It is respectfully dedicated to Dr. Paul Fischer, of Paris, the distinguished paleontologist and nialacologist. Dall, 1892.
Type: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112934?. Ball's type specimen is not marked. The figured individual is not an adult for the parietal wall is not callused; neither is it the measured specimen for the only individuals with a maximum diameter of 38 millimeters are fully adult. Either the specimen is lost, which seems improbable, or the artist has figured a smaller individual from the same locality (U.S.G.S. Sta. 2212). The slight imperfections by which the shell may be positively identified have not been reproduced. The fragile outer lip of the individual mosit closely resembling the illustration has been broken but that may well have occurred in the forty years since the shell was figured. The Museum number 112934 includes the measured individual, the immature specimen most closely resembling the figure and a third individual. Type locality: Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. Globularia fischeri (Dall) is distinguishable from other naticoids by the large, thin, highly inflated whorls, the wide, auriform aperture, and the excavated columella. In the young the umbilicus is perforate and outlined by an acute carina. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212C, 2213P, 2564r, 3419r, 7151r, ?2211C ; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646r.
Genus PACHTCEOMMIUM Woodring
1928. Pachycrommium Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2, p. 391.
Type by original designation: Amaura guppyi Gabb. Miocene of the Dominican Republic.
Shell medium-sized, stout, imperforate, spire moderately high, whorls shouldered. Aperture semi-ovate. Outer lip extending backward from suture. Basal part of inner lip folded back and closely appressed, the upper part covered by the parietal callus, which extends far down. Woodring, 1928.
Pachycrommium is recorded in the lower and middle Tertiary beds of the warm and warm-temperate zones both in Europe and North America. Most of the species now referred to Pachycrommium were hitherto called Amauropsis Morch, a cold-water group, in which the inner lip is not reverted.
Sutures channeled .......... Pachycrommium burnsii (Dall). Sutures simple:
Shoulder angle acutely rounded . ........... . ........ Pachycrommium dodonum Gardner, n. sp.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

557

Pachyerommium burnsii (Dall)
Plate LIX, figure 12
1892. Amauropsis burnsii Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 377, pi. 22, fig. 33.
Shell ampullariae-form, solid, smooth except for periodically impressed lines of growth; with seven or eight whorls; apex depressed, minute, pointed; suture distinct, with a wide channel in front of it; whorls in front of the channel evenly rounded, full, and smooth: base rounded, imperforate, the pillar with a very narrow fasciole; aperture subovate, not very oblique, the lips thickened and reflected, joined over the body by a continuous callus. Alt. of shell 18; max. diam. 15 mm. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. g. Nat. Mus. No. 112954. ' Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Aside from the perfectly preserved type, the representatives of this species occur only in fragments. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213r, 2564r, 3419P.
Pachyerommium dodonum Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIX, figures 4, 13
Shell rather large and very fragile. Spire high scalariform. Apex decorticated in all available material. Whorls probably 7, increasing uniformly in size, all but the earliest strongly tabulated; sides of whorls nearly vertical; shoulder angle acutely rounded. Body only feebly inflated, smoothly rounded at the base. Stirface smooth except for faint incremental striae and vaguely suggested spirals. Suture line distinct. Aperture wide, the exact outline lost by the imperfect labrum. Outer lip thin and sharp, patulous anteriorly, its margin broken away. Inner lip sigmoidal, reverted and reinforced anteriorly by a rather heavy callus. Parietal wall thinly washed. Umbilicus imperforate, evenly glazed.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 37.5. millimeters; maximum diameter (outer lip lost), 25± millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136073. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow Eiver, Okaloosa County, Fla. Pachyerommium dodonum is separated from Amauropsis floridana Dall of the Ballast Point silex beds by the larger size, more slender, less inflated outline and relatively higher spire, more strongly shouldered whorls, and more patulous anterior extremity. Amauropsis burnsii Dall is a smaller, more acutely tapering shell. Some of the examples of Amauropsis Guppyi gurabensis Maury approach dodonum very closely, but the number of whorls seems a little higher and the shoulder flattening less pronounced in the West Indian forms. The individual variation, as Miss Maury noted, seems unusually high. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646r, 7054r.

Superfamily STBOMBACEA
Family STBOMBEDAE
Genus STROMBTTS Linnaeus
1758. Strombus Linnaeus, Systema naturae, 10th ed., p. 742.
Type by subsequent designation, (Montfort, Conchyliologie syste'matique, vol. 2, p. 515,1810): Strombus pugilis Linnaeus. Eecent off the Florida Keys and the West Indies.
One of the largest and heaviest of the univalves. Outline ovate-conic. Spire rarely half as high as the entire shell. Whorls numerous, commonly angulated at the periphery, usually more or less nodulous or spinose in the adult, axially costate in the young and adolescent shells. Aperture elongated, not very wide, its margins subparallel. Outer lip thickened, usually lirate within, dilated but not digitate, produced backward but rarely beyond the final whorl of the spire, lobate at the posterior extremity in many species. Anal sulcus usually well-developed; a so-called "stromboid notch", possibly for the extrusion of the eye stalks, also developed near the base of the outer lip. Columella nonplicate. Parietal wall thinly washed with enamel over a large and illdefined area. Anterior canal short, recurved, deeply emarginate. Umbilicus imperforate. Eecent- shells protected by an epidermis and closed by a small linguiform operculum.
Strombus has been reported from the Cretaceous, but it does not become well established until the Tertiary. A single, not very abundant species occurs in the Eocene of the Gulf Province and another in India. In some of the lower and middle Miocene faunas of the southern Atlantic States and the West Indies the genus is exceedingly abundant and constitutes perhaps the most conspicuous element of the univalve fauna. The late Miocene seas, however, were apparently too cool to favor its development. In the warmer Pliocene seas the group regained the prominence, which it still holds in the Floridian, Antillean, and west-coast faunas. The genus has also a meager representation on the Brazilian and Senegal coasts, and a single species has been reported from the Indian Ocean.
These "conchs" so-called in popular parlance are restricted in their Eecent distribution to warm and very shallow waters, none of the Eecent east-coast forms occurring north of Hatteras and only in very shallow water. Their presence, in such great numbers in the Alum Bluff faunas is, therefore, extremely significant of the habitat in which they lived. Labrum produced posteriorly beyond suture line ............
Strombus aldrichi Dall. Labrum not produced posteriorly beyond suture line:
Axial costae of early whorls. not exceeding 18; terminal tubercle normally more prominent than the two behind it ..................... Strombus chipolanus Dall.
Axial costae of early whorls exceeding 18; terminal tu> bercle normally less prominent than the two behind it .................. Strombus dodoneus Gardner, n. sp.

558 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Strombus aldrichi Dall

Plate LV, figures 3, 8

*

1890. Strombus Aldrichi Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 175, pi. 12, figs. 1, 4.

1910. Rimella Aldrichi Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 27, pi. 7, fig. 1.

Shell of moderate size, with about nine whorls, of which two are small, smooth, and nuclear; subsequent whorls spirally threaded and ribbed or tuberculate at the shoulder; spirals fine, variable, most threadlike on the early whorls, on the last whorl wavy and obsolete; early whorls transversely ribbed with 10-14 small, rounded riblets, which gradually become fewer and more nodulous until nothing but the nodules are left; on the first half of the last whorl the nodules are obsolete, on the second half there are three or four large nodules much larger than any others on the shell; behind the shoulder the shell is slightly excavated and the suture distinctly appressed and sometimes margiuated by a few extra large spirals in front of it; in the vicinity of the last nodule the posterior edge of the last whorl is produced backward until it reaches the second or third whorl, counting backward; on the back of the last whorl are often a few feeble, elevated, irregular waves or obscure tubercles midway between the shoulder and the canal, recalling the stronger and more numerous waves in 8. granulatus; aperture narrow, produced 'backward, squarish behind, with a groove at the commissure and an obscure subsutural ridge; outer lip in front of the angle nearly straight, smooth inside, or with a few faint granulations or lirations anteriorly; genital sulcus well marked: canal short, recurved; body with a wide and moderately thick coat of callus, but no lirae. Max. Ion. of shell 62.0; max. lat. 36.0 millimeters.
This fine species forms, in its characters, a sort of transition from 8. albirupianus toward 8. piigilis and 8. granulatus of the Recent fauna, being more like the latter than the former. It is also recalled by the 8. Bonellii Brogn. of the European Miocene (Dax, Vienna Basin), which is a larger and less elegant species. 8. Aldrichi cannot be regarded as a link in the ancestral chain of 8. pug His, since the latter was already in existence in the Haitian Miocene, but its relations to 8. granulatus are closer. At all events, it combines characters which in Recent species seem to be parted among several specific forms.
This species is very abundant in the Chipola beds, holding there much such a place as 8. pugilis does at some points on the Floridian coast to-day. It varies very much as £. pugilis does, having varieties corresponding to var. alatus and other mutations of £. pugilis. The strength and to some extent the character of the spirals on the last whorl varies: sometimes we have two sets of coarser and finer wavy grooves, with wider, flattish interspaces; sometimes the fine grooves are obsolete and the sculpture is of wide, well-marked, rounded channels, with rounded, not much elevated ridges between them. The sculpture of the young, as might be expected, is more uniform, and the species is sufficiently characteristic to be easily recognized, even in *its most extreme variations. Dall, 1890.

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112226. Type locality: No. 2212, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Fla. Three volutions are sometimes completed in the larval stage.
Miss Maury's species was described from a broken tip, but there is no doubt of its identity with Strombus aldrichi.

Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212p, 2213a, 2564C, 3419% 7151?, 7256r, 2211?; Cornell University collection.
Strombus chipolanus Dall
Plate LV, figure 6
1890. 8troml>us chipolanus Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3. pt. 1, p. 176, pi. 4, fig. 1.
1915. Stronibus chipolanus Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 87, pi. 9, figs. 8, 10 (in part).
Shell with nine or ten whorls, of which about two are small, smooth, and nuclea>r, the others ribbed, varicose, tuberculate and spirally sculptured; early whorls with twelve or more narrow, rounded ribs, gradually becoming angxilar, tuberculate, larger, and finally tubercles pure and simple, of which there are nine or ten on the shoulder of the last whorl, the last or penultimate being the most prominent of all; spiral sculpture of rounded threads, becoming gradually obsolete, and on the last whorl narrower and more distant than in £. Aldrichi in most cases, but varying much as in th^it species; spire variable in height, sometimes high and slender as in the silex fossil figured, but generally much the same proportions as in 8. Aldrichi; last whorl attentuated anteriorly; shoulder less excavated and less regular than in Aldrichi, usually with two more prominent threads in front of the somewhat appressed suture ; outer lip widest behind, little ascending, not reaching the suture at the beginning of the last whorl; commissure deep, narrow, not grooved; there is no subsutural ridge, but on the body behind are foxir or five lirae; outer lip angulated and widest at the shoulder, simple, a row of small, short lirae within it as in dwarf specimens of 8. bitubcrculatus; pillar with a thin callus, sharply recurved in front, with a distinct fascicle; canal narrow, much recurved, obliquely truncate; genital sulcus distinct; last whorl sometimes wavy on the back as in S. integer. Max. Ion. of adult shell 70.0; max. lat. 45.0 millimeters.
This form recalls the smallest specimens of £. bituberculatus and is the analog of 8. coronatus Defrance, of the European Miocene, but is considerably smaller. It is much less common than 8. Aldrichi, from which it may readily be distinguished by its nonascending posterior lip. its lirate body and throat, and the general form of the aperture. It transmits several of the features of 8. albirupianus, and we fancy that they seem to reappear in the recent S. bituberculatus Lam. It may possibly be identical with Sowerby's $. bifrons, but which is a much smaller shell, of which the aperture has not been figured. The differences appear too great to unite them without more data. Dall, 1890.
The almost perfect adult measured in 1890 but not figured until 1915 is the lectotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112227), from U. S. Geological Survey locality 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. The incomplete spire figured in 1890 is diagrammatically drawn and difficult to identify. It may be one of the spires included under U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112224, from U. S. Geological Survey locality 2212, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.
Stroiribus chipolanus Dall differs from 8. dodoneus, so prolific in the Oak Grove fauna, in the more slender spire, the greater number of whorls both of the conch and protoconch, the fewer axial costae on the early whorls 12 or 15 as opposed to 20 to 24 the slightly higher average number of spinose tubercles on the body

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

559

usually 10 instead of 9 the greater prominence of the terminal tubercle, and the more uniform and more evenly lirate spiral sculpture.
The species has not been certainly recognized except from the vicinity of Baileys Ferry on the Chipola Eiver, and it is comparatively rare even within this limited area.
The fragmentary specimens from the Tampa silex beds referred by Ball 1892 and Ball 1915 to Strombus chipolanus are included by Mansfield under Strombus liocyclus Ball., a species with a more slender spire and more numerous and more regularly spaced axials.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities ?7893r, 2212P, 2213P,.2564P, 3419», ?7151P, 10971 r, ?7468r.
Strombus dodoneus Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figures 4, 7, 9
Shell rather small for the genus, heavy, ovate-conic. Spire rather low. Nuclear whorls small, smooth, highly polished when perfectly preserved, acutely tapering, 4 to 5 in number; initial half turn slightly bulbous, the 4 succeeding volutions rounded, trapezoidal, and increasing in size and inflation with a moderate degree of rapidity. Line between conch and protoconch marked by a slight thickening of the shell. Adult conch 9 or 10 times coiled. Earliest sculpture feeble and irregular, but before the end of the second conchal whorl there is a well-established ornamentation of approximately 22 sharply rounded axial costae, equisized except for an occasional varix, equispaced, and uniform in prominence from suture to suture; spiral sculpture a little later in development and less uniform, usually about 12 low, flat, crowded lirae to a turn in the adolescent shell. First 4 to 6 whorls of conch laterally compressed with a tendency toward a peripheral bulge and regularly increasing in size; fifth or sixth whorl marked by abrupt development of an obtuse shoulder and by increased rapidity in growth. Sculpture much more variable .after initiation of shoulder. Costals rapidly evanescing behind the periphery, less rapidly in front of it, and becoming gradually transformed into peripheral tubercles and on the body whorl into obtuse spines, of which the last 2 before the terminal tubercle are usually the most prominent; number of axial protuberances decreasing from 22 on the early whorls of the conch to about 9 on the body. Spirals irregular, varying in number and character, usually 7 to 9 sharp, V-shaped elevations upon the shoulders of the whorls with intercalated lirae or finer ridges, all of them finely crenulated in many individuals by the incrementals; sculpture in front of the periphery generally absent or concealed by the succeeding volu. tion; spiral sculpture on body whorl unevenly developed, the primaries in the most strongly sculptured forms numbering 20 to 25, lirate or more frequently Vshaped, either low and rather wide or high, sharp, and

narrow; intercalates fortuitous; spirals commonly obsolete over the posterior two-thirds of the body, especially in the earlier half, strongest and most persistent near the anterior canal; siphonal fascicle obscurely lirate. Suture lines distinct, impressed, varying in the degree of appression, sometimes placed well in front of the peripheral tubercles or quite as often closely appressed to the summit of the tubercles on the shoulder of the preceding whorl and deeply sinuated by them. Aperture moderately wide, the margins subparallel. Outer lip thickened in the adult, irregularly lirate within, flaring away from the aperture, obtusely angulated at the shoulder, obliquely retreating before and behind it; basal constriction broad and not very deep. Labrum produced backward but not more than halfway across to the suture line. Posterior commissure obscurely sulcate. Labiuni straight, simple. Body callus extensive, moderately heavy. Siphonal fasciole well differentiated. Anterior canal recurved, broadly emarginate. Umbilicus closed by the reflected callus of the inner lip.
Bimensions of holotype: Height, 69 millimeters; maximum diameter including tubercles, 51 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 36
millimeters. Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350381; figured ju-
venile, U. S. Nat, Mus. No. 371867. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Okaloosa
County, Fla. 8trombus dodoneus is the very prolific analog in the
Oak Grove fauna of the rather rare 8. chipolanus of the Chipola beds. The two species are similar superficially, but the early whorls are dissimilar, and there are some specific differences that persist to the final whorl. The nucleus of 8. dodoneus is 4 or 5-whorled; that of 8. chipolanus 2 or at the most 3. The axial costae run about 22 on the earlier whorls of 8. dodoneus, about 12 to 15 on the earlier whorls of 8. chipolanus. The spire is, as a rule, more slender and more regularly tapering in the Chipola species, although there is considerable variation in relative altitude on both forms. The abrupt angulation of the periphery, the sudden increase in rate of growth, and the frequent immersion of the later whorls of the spire to the tips of their tubercles are all characters peculiar to the Oak Grove form. The adolescent stage is apparently longercontinued in dodoneus, and the youthful sculpture persists through at least two additional turns. The total number of whorls in 8. chipolanus is usually 9 or 10, in 8. dodoneus 14 or 15, and the excess number of whorls is accounted for during the larval and adolescent stages of the latter. The adult spiral sculpture of 8. chipolanus is more uniform and more evenly lirate than the more or less unequal and inequispaced, Vshaped ridges of 8. dodoneus. The body tubercles are usually 9 in the latter and commonly 10 in the former,

560 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

and in 8. dodoneus the terminal tubercle is less prominent than the 2 behind it; in 8. chipolanus it is usually more so. The relation of 8. dodoneus to the Eecent forms is not very obvious, but it suggests 8. tuberculatus Lamarck in the characters of the adolescent shell and in the relative prominence of the tubercles on the adult. It differs, however, in the outline of the labrum and in the absence of the two spiral series of nodules developed on the body of the adult in the Eecent form.
Strombus dodoneus compensates in number of individuals for the paucity of species in the Oak Grove strombus fauna.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646pr, 5632P, 5630a, 7054C.
Genus ORTHAULAX Gabb
1872. Orthaulax Gabb, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 24, p. 272.
( =Hippochrenen Zittel (in part). TPafiwerta Heilprin, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 1, p. 105, 1887; type by monotypy: Wagneria pugnax Heilprin; Tampa Silex beds.)
1890. Orthaulax Gabb. Ball, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 169.
1921. Orthaulax Cooke, U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 129-B, p. 23.
Type by monotypy: Orthaulax inornatus Gabb. Tampa limestone of Florida; Baitoa formation of the Dominican Eepublic.
Shell rounded fusiform, canal moderate, straight and regularly tapering; adult shell enveloped over the whole spire by an extension of the inner lip; posterior canal fissurelike, formed by the continued edge of the outer lip and running directly to the apex. Outer lip apparently sharp and simple; anterior notch oblique and broad. Gabb, 1872.
The essential difference between Orthaulax and Hippochrenes, Catyptrophorus, Rimella, etc., is that the involution of the spire, once commenced, is carried on by the posterior edge of the last or growing whorl continuously from the young condition in Orthaulax; while in the others the spire remains normal until the shell reaches its adult state and then, with the changes in the mantle, which incite the deposition of the thickened and enlarged "outer lip, a process is developed at the posterior commissure of the aperture and mantle, which deposits enamel on the spire against which it lies, and it thus forms a gutter, sometimes straight, sometimes recurved, in which it is sheltered; apart from this the spire is enveloped, if at all, not by any expansion of the lip, but by a deposit of enamel which covers the whole, as frosting does a cake, without any relation to the coil of the shell considered as an organic product. Strip off the whole involving, continuous enamel from Calyptrophorus and the whorls will remain intact ; strip off the equivalent deposit in Orthaulax and the shell itself is destroyed. The latter, so far as its structure is concerned, is more nearly like an involute Terebellum (such as T. sopitum Brander, figured by Zittel) than like the enameled Oalyptrophorus or winged Hippochrenes.
The latter wait until they have attained their majority and then spread their outer lips and lay down their enamel, once for all. In Orthaulax the involution, as in Ovulum, begins

before maturity and continues with the growth of the shell without regard to its age or periodical resting stages. In this particular it is clearly distinguished from any other group included in the Strombidde, excepting the sufficiently distinct Terebellum. Dall, 1890.
Orthaulax gabbi Dall
Plate LV, figures 1, 2, 5
1890. Orthaulax gabbi Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 170, pi. 12, figs. 5, 5a, 5b.
Shell large, solid, many-whorled; in the very young (fig. 5) smooth and polished, except for incremental lines and a few faintly impressed spiral lines anteriorly; nucleus small, polished, glassy, not differentiated from the rest of the shell; early whorls with a very distinct, not channeled suture; the whorl in front of it is slightly turreted; each whorl after the third has three slightly elevated, narrow, rounded varices, somewhat irregularly spaced, so that they do not follow each other continuously down the slope of the spire; about the end of the eighth whorl the posterior edge of the outside whorl begins to be prolonged backward more and more as the shell grows, so that the suture thus, formed makes an irregular spiral line ascending the spire over the antecedent whorls until by about the tenth turn the whole of the spire is enveloped, as well as any barnacles, vermetus, or other semiparasitic growth which may have become attached to the surface of the spire; the anterior part of the shell has the shape of Leiorhynus, the pillar is rather thick and slightly recurved, with a moderately distinct fascicle; the canal moderately wide, shorter than the pillar; the outer lip simple, sharp, a little thickened at the resting stages, but not lirate internally; body with a moderate callus, which at the resting stages is considerably enlarged, so that when the whorl conies to grow over it (as it is not absorbed) it produces an irregularity somewhat like a varix; the whorls are ovately rounded, smooth, except for occasional transverse undulations due to irregularities of growth, and polished; no indications of color pattern have been observed.
The adolescent form (figs. 5 a, 5b [pi. LV, figs. 1, 2 of this report]) a good deal resembles a Strombus, except that the anterior sulcus of the outer lip behind the canal is absent or represented only by the faintest wave in the margin; the spire is entirely enveloped by the backward prolongation of the last whorl, except at the tip, where the envelope is usually a little eroded or defective; there appears to be a resting stage at every two-thirds of a revolution of the whorl around the axis, for which reason, looking down on the spire, the outline of the shell transverse to the axis is subtriangular or three-sided; the outer lip is simple, rather sharp-edged, and very slightly, if at all, recurved; it extends backward to the tip of the spire, near which it recedes somewhat from its parallelism with the axis; at the shoulder, also, it is slightly excavated and thickened ; the body is smooth, with a moderate callus, which becomes thicker near the shoulder; at the shoulder, in front of the excavation above noted, it becomes very thick, and is continued on to the spire parallel with the outer lip, and very near it, so that between the two is a narrow, flexuous groove of considerable depth; when the shell begins to grow again the whorl is carried over this ridge, which is not absorbed, and the surface is thus rendered, as it were, varicose; the canal is short, strongly recurved, with a remarkably deep siphonal sulcus, so that the end of the pillar stands forward in a marked way; on the shoulder, half way around the shell, is an illdefined, narrow ridge, which ceases a little way behind the

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

561

lip. The dimensions of the figured specimen are: Lon. 68.0 [65.5] ; max. lat. 35.0 millimeters.
The adult form differs from the adolescent by the disproportionate strength of the ridge at the shoulder, by which the surface behind the ridge has become flattish as in a Cassis, but more irregular, and the width at the shoulder has increased in proportion to the total length. , No entirely complete specimen of the adult has been found, but from the numerous fragments the proportions can be approximately determined. The max. diam. is 74.0 and the length about 110.0 mm., of which 15.0 mm. are behind the shoulder, while, in the specimen only 68.0 mm. long, there are 17.0 mm. of length behind the shoulder.
This species appears abundantly, though in a poor state of preservation, in the lower bed at Alum Bluff, and in the Chipola beds to the westward. The group in America would seem to be characteristic of the lower beds of the Southern Miocene, as far as our present knowledge permits us to judge.
I have observed that, occasionally, the ridge on the shoulder in young specimens is represented by a nodule rather than a ridge. Dall, 1890.
Cotypes: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112218. Type locality: No. 2112,1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Although numerous collections have been made in Flori4a since the publication of Ball's Wagner papers, no new localities have been added nor has more perfect material been found. The species is still limited in its known distribution to the Alum Bluff and Chipola beds. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212C, 2213a, 2564r, 3419», 7256r, 10971r, 2211C, 7183C.
Family XENOPHORIDAE
Genus XENOPHORA Flscher von Waldheim
1807. Xenophora Fischer von Waldheim, Museum Demidoff, vol. 3, p. 213.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 158, 1847) : Xenophora laevigata Fischer von Waldheim=7Voe/&«s conchyliophorus Born. Kecent off the eastern coast of the United States from Hatteras to the Antilles and in the Gulf of Mexico. Fossil throughout the East Coast and Gulf Tertiaries and in the Pleistocene.
Shell trochiform but not nacreous; imperforate or narrowly unbilicate. Base flattened or subconic; the peripheral keel commonly acute. Aperture obliquely quadrate. Shell armoured with agglutinated extraneous objects of such dimensions that the diameter of the shell may be doubled by the load that it carries.
Xenophora textilina Dall
Plate LVII, figures 31, 32
1892. Xenophora textilina Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci., Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 361.
It [Xenophora conchyliophora (Born)] is followed in the Older Miocene of the Chipola beds by an analogous form, X. textilina Dall, which differs in having the granulation of the surface coarser and stronger, being marked even on the upper

surface, and in having the base, especially round the umbilicus (which is small and sometimes nearly closed), distinctly spirally grooved. This shell reaches 55 millimeters in diameter (exclusive of its load, which is a large one), has eight or nine whorls, and an elevation of 35 millimeters. The basal grooves are shallow and narrower than their interspaces, which have the effect of half a dozen flattish spiral ribs. The umbilicus is larger than in X. conchyliophora, but not so large as in Tugurmm. The basal margin is little excavated and not at all produced. Dall, 1892.
The surface of the spire when not concealed by agglutinated objects is closely and finely lirated, the lirae uniform in strength and spacing but inconsistent in direction.
The fragment from the Shoal Eiver beds, the only trace of the presence of the genus at that horizon, has apparently a somewhat larger umbilicus than the Chipola form and the spiral sculpture around the umbilicus is heavier and more sharply defined.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r ; Shoal Eiver formation, locality ?3742r.
Superfamily CALYPTEAEACEA
Morley Davies, 1935,23 has questioned the propriety of uniting the Calyptraeidae, the Capulidae, and the Hipponicidae under a single superfamily, believing that the members of these three families may be of diverse stock and that their apparent resemblance is due to their adaptation to a sessile environment. However, he admits that "In all there is a dextral spiral protoconch, which rapidly opens out in trumpet form before the adult sculpture begins." The anatomical characters which the three families share may be degenerate and result from their common sessile habit.
Family CALYPTBAEIDAE
Genus CALTPTEAEA Lamarck
1799. Calyptraea Lamarck, Prodrome d'une nouvelle Classification des coquilles, Soc. histoire nat. Paris Me"m., p. 78.
Type by monotypy: Patella cMnensis Linnaeus. Kecent on the European coast from the British Isles to the Mediterranean. Fossil in the Pliocene and Pleistocene.
Shell conic to trochiform. Base circular or rarely oval. Apex medial, spiral. Inner diaphragm developed analogous to inner cup of Crucibulum and posterior lamina of Crepidula. Columellar margin of diaphragm twisted to form a false umbilicus. . Outer margin adherent to periphery of shell. Free margin convex.
The genus originated in the Cretaceous and the distribution of the Kecent representatives is world-wide. The forms attach themselves to extraneous objects and are peculiarly characteristic of the inshore waters..
Periphery subcircular in outline; external surface smooth except for faint incremental striae ................... Calyptraea centralis (Conrad).
23 Davies, Morley, Tertiary faunas, vol. 1, The Composition of Ter. tiary faunas, p. 243, 1935.

562 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Periphery oval in outline; external surface sculptured with approximately 10 or 12 fine edged, crenulated, concentric lamellae .................. Calyptraea crenata Gardner, n. sp.
Calyptraea centralis (Conrad)
Plate LVI, figures 3, 4, 5
1841. Infuiidibulum cent rails Conrad, Am. Jour. Sci., 1st. ser., vol. 41, p. 348.
1845. Iiifundibulum centralis Conrad, Fossils of the Medial Tertiary of the United States, p. 80, pi. 45, fig. 5.
1846. Calyptmea (Infundibulum) concentricum H. C. Lea, Am. Phil. Soc. Trans., new ser., vol. 9, p. 249, pi. 35, fig. 39.
1856. Trochita centralis (Conrad). Tuoniey and Holmes, Pleiocene fossils of South Carolina, p. 109, pi. 25, fig. 8.
1858. Trochita centralis Conrad. Emrnons, North Carolina Geol. Survey Rept., p. 276, fig. 193.
1863. Trochita (Infundifailum) centralis Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 568.
1863. Trochita (Infundibulum) concentrica Lea. Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 568.
1864. Trochita centralis Conrad. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., No. 183, p. 15.
1864. Trochita concentrica (H. C. Lea) Conrad. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsonian Misc. Coll. No. 183, p. 15.
1875. cnG-alerus parvulus Bunker. Deutsche Mal. Gesell. Jahrb., p. 244.
1881. Trochita Collinsii Gabb, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour., 2d ser., vol. 8, p. 342, pi. 44, figs. 11, lla. Described from the lower Miocene at Sapote, Costa Rica.
1889. (?) Calyptraea Gandeana D'Orbigny. Dall, Harvard Coll., Mus. Comp. Zoology. Bull. 18, p. 284.
1892. Calyptraea centralis (Conrad). Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 353.
1904. Calyptraea centralis (Conrad). Martin, Maryland Geol. Survey, Miocene, p. 248. pi. 59, figs. 2a, 2b, 2c.
1909. Calyptraea centralis Conrad. Grabau and Shinier, North American index fossils, vol. 1, p. 713, figs. 1029a-c (after Martin).
1919. Calyptraea centralis Conrad. Gardner and Aldrich, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 18 (check list, name only).
1922. Calyptraea centralis (Conrad). Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 385.
1925. Calyptraea centralis Conrad. Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 10, No. 42, p. 243, pi. 43, fig. 2.
1930. Calyptraea centralis (Conrad). Mansfield. Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 120.
?1937. Calyptraea centralis Conrad. Smith. Maxwell, East coast marine shells, p. 95, pi. 36, fig. 9.
Obtusely ovate, with fine concentric irregular lines; apex central. Conrad, 1841.

line of free margin of diaphragm sigmoidal, deeply and narrowly sinuated near the periphery but arching forward between the sinus and the reverted inner edge of the septum.
This species is well marked by a sort of umbilicus on the pillar, where it is reflected, and by the arching forward of the free edge of the septum, characters which have been exactly preserved since the early Miocene. The only modification visible during the whole of that period, as represented by a full series of specimens, is a slight increase of size from the early to the later Miocene, and a slight average decrease since, the Recent specimens being about the size of those from the Chipola beds, while those from the Natural Well, Duplin County, are the largest. The differences, however, are not great, and may be accidental to- the particular locality rather than characteristic of chronological changes. Dall, 1892.
The Chipola forms in question are probably young; an individual from Shoal Eiver measures 25.0 millimeters in diameter. The Eecent individuals in our collections average no more than 6.0 millimeters, and this consistent difference in size is probably of taxonomic significance.
The figured individual, from St. Marys Eiver, Maryland, is in the Aldrich collection of Johns Hopkins University. It measures 10 millimeters in height and 18 millimeters in maximum diameter.
^Calyptraea centralis (Conrad) is one of the few forms common to all horizons of the Alum Bluff.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 7257r, 2213C, 2564r, 3419C, 7151?, 2211?; Oak Grove sand, localities 3385r, 7148r, 2646a, 5632C, 5631?, 5633?, 7054?, 10659r ; Shoal Eiver formation, 3856?, 3742a, 10658r, 5184r, 5079?, 3733r, 5618r.
Outside occurrence: Miocene: St. Marys formation, Maryland-Virginia; Yorktown formation, North Carolina; Duplin marl, North Carolina-South Carolina; Choctawhatchee formation (Ecpliora and Cancellaria, zones), Florida; Waccamaw formation, North Carolina. Pliocene: Caloosahatchee marl, Florida. Becent: Eeported from Cape Hatteras to the Gulf of Mexico and the West Indies in 1 to 52 fathoms.
Pilsbry has reported the species from the Miocene of Santo Domingo, Gabb from the lower Miocene of Costa Eica, and Miss Maury from the upper Miocene and the Pliocene of Trinidad.

Type locality: Natural Well, 2 miles southwest of Magnolia, Duplin County, N. C.
Shell rather small, capuloid or conic. Apex central. Nucleus glassy, of one and one-half volutions, the initial half turn largely immersed, the succeeding whorl coiled in the same horizontal plane but more inflated and rapidly increasing in diameter. Axis of coiling of conch at a high angle to that of protoconch. Lateral slope steeper in the apical region, rather abruptly flattening a third or a half of the way to the periphery. Surface smooth except for swirling incrementals. Out-

Calyptraea crenata Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVI, figures 1, 2
Shell rather large and low for the genus, oval turbinate. Apex posterior and sinistral. Nucleus small, smoothly coiled in 1% volutions at a low angle to the axis of the conch. Initial half turn largely immersed; succeeding whorl inflated and increasing rapidly in size. Conch performing approximately two elliptical volutions, the final whorl contracted at its extremity like the infolded end of a turban. External surface

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

563

sculptured with incremental striae and, at regular intervals, sharp, crenate lamellae, 10 in number in the type, 12 in the only other individual known. Peritreme irregularly emarginate. Internal diaphragm thin, concave, its outer edge adherent to the periphery. Columellar margin twisted into a minute loop which simulates a true umbilicus; columella strongly posterior and sinistral.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 6.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 14.8 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 13.7 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136053. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. Calyptraea crenata is a remarkable form, conspicuous for its oval, turbinate outline, and its sculpture of fineedged, crenulated lamellae. It is known only from the type locality; two individuals were collected. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand^ locality 2646r.
Genus CBEPIDTTLA Lamarck
1799. Crepidula Lamarck, Prodrome d'une nouvelle classification des coquilles: Soc. histoire nat. Paris M£m., p. 78.
1892. Crepidula Dall, W. H., Wagner Free Inst Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, pp. 354-356.
Type by monotypy: Patella fornicata Linnaeus. Miocene to Kecent on the east coast and Gulf and in the West Indies.
Ovate or oblong, slightly concave to strongly convex in outline. Apex posterior, submarginal. Aperture closed posteriorly by a horizontal lamella analogous to the inner cup of Crucibulimi and the diaphragm of Calyptraea; free margin of septum straight, concave, or sigmoidal.
The genus is first recognized in the Cretaceous, although it does not become abundant until the middle of the Tertiary. The Recent "boat" or "slipper" shells are among the most prolific denizens of the shallower waters of the warm and tropical seas.
Dall, 1892, has discussed at length the influence of situs upon a perching form like Crepidula.
Two of the three common Tertiary species are represented at each horizon of the Alum Bluff group, and no new forms have been introduced, unless some peculiar dwarfish little forms from Oak Grove, which have been tentatively referred to G. fornicata Lamarck, are included. The genus is best represented at the Oak Grove horizon. Surface sculptured. ..... ..Crepidula aculeata costata Morton
Surface not sculptured: Surface convex.. ...... .Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus) Surface flattened or slightly concave .Crepidula plana Say
Crepidula aculeata costata Morton
1829. Crepidula costata Morton, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour., 1st ser., vol. 6, p. 115, pi. 7, figs. 2, 3.
?1843. Crepidula spinosa Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 1, p. 307.

1856. Crypta spinosa (Conrad). Tuomey and Holmes, Pleiocene fossils of South Carolina, p. Ill, pi. 25, fig. 10.
1856. Crypta costata (Morton). Tuomey and Holmes, Pleiocene fossils of South Carolina, p. 112, pi. 25, fig. 11.
1892. Crepidula aculeata Gmelin, var. costata Morton. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 357.
1919. Crepidula aculeata subsp. costata Morton. Gardner and Aldrich, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 18 (check list, name only).
1930. Crepidula aculeata var. costata Morton. Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 115.
1930. Crepidula aculeata var. spinosa Conrad. Mansfield, idem, p. 115.
Shell oval, thick, very convex, with numerous longitudinal elevated costae; beaked side flattened; margin plain.
Length 1% inch. Breadth 1% inch. Depth 1 inch. Morton. 1829.
Morton's type was among the shells in the Finch collection, reported, apparently erroneously, to have been made from Maryland. This species, like many other of the Finch shells, is not recorded in the later extensive work of Clark and Martin, but as Mansfield indicated in 1930, it is characteristically represented in the Yorktown formation of Virginia and rarely in the St. Marys. Mansfield has considered the varietal form C. spinosa Conrad, described from the James Kiver near Smithfield, Va., as taxononiically distinct. In Florida, C. aculeata is restricted almost or altogether to the Ecphora zone; G. spinosa is abundant, according to Mansfield, at Jackson Bluff, which is in the Ecphora zone; it is also common in the Gancellaria zone at the Deadens, a local name given to an area of prairie topography broken by numerous sinks. In North Carolina, at Natural Well, the two forms are apparently coexistent, and the differences in outline and sculpture pattern seem to be without taxonomic significance.
The Recent forms, like Calyptraea centralis, are consistently smaller than the upper Miocene individuals. The representation in the Alum Bluff group is restricted to three specimens from a single locality in the Shoal River formation, all of them small, not strongly arched, and with a nonspinose, C. costata type of sculpture.
Shell heavy, ovate or oblong, varying rather widely in degree of convexity. Beak posterior, submarginal, more or less twisted. Protoconch small, similar to that of Calyptraea cew£ra^;vsmooth, polished, one and a half times coiled. Surface sculptured with spinose or rugose lirae radiating from the beak to the outer margin. Internal lamina posterior, covering approximately half the aperture. Free margin of lamina loosely sigmoidal.
Crepidula aculeata costata Morton is distinguished from all other coexistent members of the genus in the east-coast Neogene by the development of a strong external sculpture. In abundance and wide distribution, it is second only to Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus).
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 5618r. Outside occurrence: Miocene: St. Marys formation,

564 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Virginia; Yorktown formation, Virginia-Nprth Carolina; Duplin marl, North Carolina-South Carolina. Pliocene: Choctawhatchee formation, Florida; Waccamaw formation, North Carolina-South Carolina.
Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus)
1758. Patella fornicata Linnaeus, Systema naturae, 10th ed, p. 781.
1822. Crepidula fornicata Lamarck, Systeme des animaux sans vert6bres, vol. 6, p. 24.
1822. Crepidula fornicata ? var. Say, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour., 1st ser., vol. 2, p. 225.
1843. Crepidula densata Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, Proc., vol. 1, p. 311.
1844. Crepidula cym'baeformis Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 1, p. 173.
1846. Calyptraea (Crepidula) ponderosa H. C. Lea, Am. Phil. Soc. Trans., new ser., vol. 9, p. 249, pi. 35, fig. 40.
1846. Calyptraea (Crepidula) cornucopiae H. C. Lea, Am. Phil. Soc. Trans., new ser., vol. 9, p. 250, pi. 35, fig. 41.
1856. Crypta fornicata (Lamarck). Tuomey and Holmes, Pleiocene fossils of South Carolina, p. 110, pi. 25, fig. 9.
1858. Crepidula fornicata Emmons, North Carolina Geol. Survey Rept., p. 276, fig. 194.
1861. Crypta cymboeformis Conrad, Fossils of the medial Tertiary of the United States, p. 81, pi. 45, fig. 7.
1861. Crypta densata Conrad, Fossils of the medial Tertiary of the United States, p. 81, pi. 45, fig. 9.
1861. Crypta fornicata Lamarck. Conrad, Fossils of the medial Tertiary of the United States, p. 81, pi. 45, fig. 10.
1863. Crypta (Crepidula) cornucopia H. C. Lea. Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 569.
1863. Crypta (Crepidula) oymbaeformis Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 569.
1863. Crypta, (Crepidula) densata, Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 569.
1863. Crypta (Crepidula) fornicatal Say. Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 569.
1864. Crypta cornucopia (H. C. Lea) Conrad. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., No. 183, p. 15.
1864. Crypta cymMformis Conrad. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsoniau Misc. Coll., No. 183, p. 15.
1864. Crypta densata Conrad. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., No. 183, p. 15.
1864. Crypta fornicata (Say?) Conrad. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., No. 183, p. 15.
1870. Crepidula rostrata Conrad, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 6, p. 77.
1870. Crepidula trirginica Conrad, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 6, p. 78.
1870. Crepidula recurvirostra Conrad, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 6, p. 78.
1886. Crepidula fornicata Linneaus. Tryon, Manual of Conchology, vol. 8, p. 124, pi. 36, figs. 1-8.
1892. Crepidula fornicata (Lamarck) Say. Ball, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 356.
1904. Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus). Martin, Maryland Geol. Survey, Miocene, p. 249, pi. 59, figs. 4a, 4b.
1905. Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus). Clark, Maryland Geol. Survey, Pliocene and Pleistocene, p. 189, pi. 51, figs. 1-4.
1908. Crepidula fornicata Linnaeus. Rogers, The shell book, p. 148, pi. 44, figs. 5, 6.
1909. Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus). Grabau and Shimer, North American index fossils, vol. 1, p. 714, figs. 1031c and d.

1919. Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus). Gardner and Aldrich, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 18.
1925. Crepidula fornicata Linnaeus. Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 10, no. 42, p. 244.
1930. Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus). Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 116.
1930. Crepidula fornicata var. ponderosa H. C. Lea. Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 117.
1930. Crepidula, fornicata cymbaeformis Conrad. Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 117.
1930. Crepidula fornicata rostrata Conrad. Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 117.
1937. Crepidula fornicata Linnaeus. Maxwell Smith, East coast marine shells, p. 95, pi. 36, figs. 5a, 5b; pi. 68, fig. 16; pi. 69, figs. 23, 24.
P. testa Integra ovali postice oblique recurva, labio postico concavo. * * * Habitat ad Ilvam (Elba) insulam. Linnaeus, 1758.
Shell transversely wrinkled, varying in convexity, with obsolete longitudinal, undulated, rufous lines; .one side more oblique than the other; apex excurved, a little prominent, but not separated from the body of the shell, and generally united with the margin of the aperture; aperture suboval; diaphragm a little concave, occupying at least half of the length, edge generally reclivate.'
Inhabits the coast of the United States. Length 2 inches. Say, 1822.
The typical fornicata is found as characteristic in the Chesapeake Miocene as in the Recent fauna. C. cymboeformis is a station variety due to growth on a narrow, arched surface of moderately large size, such as the exterior of a Melongena, shell.
C. ponderosa is due to luxuriant growth on a similar but smaller surface, necessitating an increased vertical and consequently spiral enlargement; C. densata to growth on a flatter but still inconveniently limited surface in the matter of area; C. rostrata is one of a series of Crepidulae which probably grew on each other's backs, as they may frequently be seen to do now among the oyster-beds, sometimes as many as six being mounted one upon another; C. recurvirostra is the same thing, and C. virginica is a frank synonym of the typical fornicata. Ball, 1892.
Shell ovate or oblong, varying widely in degree of convexity. Apex posterior, submarginal. Nucleus small, smooth, polished, of one and one-half or two dextrally inclined volutions. Sculpture absent except for incrementals. Internal lamina flattened or slightly concave, covering, as a rule, a little more than the posterior half of the aperture. Free edge of septum concave or loosely sigmoidal.
Like all perching forms, Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus) is exceedingly variable in outline. It is isolated from the co-existent species by the absence of characters diagnostic of other forms rather than by the presence of constant characters of its own. Crepidula aculeata costata Morton develops an axial sculpture; Crepidula plana Say runs much smaller than C. fornicata and is flattened or concave rather than convex. The Kecent Crepidula, convexa Say is similar in absence of sculpture and outline but is characterized by the straight margin of the septum.

CTENOBKANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

565

Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus) is the most common of the "slipper" or "boat" shells of the east coast. Indeed, so abundant are these "quarter-decks," as they are called in trade, that they have a commercial value and are sold to the oyster growers for four or five cents a bushel to serve as "clutch" for the oyster spat.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213p, 2564P (young), 3419e ; Oak Grove sand, localities 3385P, 7148r, 2646a, 5632P (young), 5631? (young), 5633»; Shoal River formation, localities 3742C, 5079P, ?3733P (young), ?5618r (young), 9959r.
Outside occurrence: Miocene: Calvert formation, Maryland-Virginia; Choptank formation, Maryland; St. Marys formation, Virginia; Yorktown formation, Virginia-North Carolina; Duplin marl, North CarolinaGeorgia ; Choctawhatchee formation, Florida. Pliocene: Waccamaw formation, North Carolina-South Carolina; Nashua marl, Florida; Caloosahatchee marl, Florida; Croatan sand, North Carolina. Pleistocene: Massachusetts; Maryland; New Jersey; Virginia; South Carolina; Florida. Recent: Prince Edward Island to the West Indies in 2 to 19 fathoms.
Crepidula aesop Dall
1903. Crepidula aesop Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 6, p. 1610, pi. 55, figs. 6, 7 (no description).
1930. Crepidula aesop Dall ( ? Crepidula fornicata var. rostrata Conrad). Mansfield, Florida State Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 118.
Dall figured a young shell from Shell Creek characterized by the laterally compressed outline, high free beak, and obscure and irregular radial sculpture.
Mansfield was not sure that it was separable from Crepidula rostrata Conrad. Conrad's species was described from a shell from the Virginia Miocene. No locality was given and no figure. He listed among the characters a short diaphragm with a slightly concave but not a sinuous margin. The diaphragm in Crepidula aesop is short and deeply inset. The margin in the adult is sinuous.
About 25 or 30 individuals from the Oak Grove sand are dubiously referred to C. aesop Dall, although they may be nothing more than another mutant of Crepidula fornicata. They are all laterally compressed, 5 or 6 millimeters high, and relatively heavy, suggesting adult dwarfs. In most of them an irregular radial corrugation is developed over a whole or a part of the shell, but this is of such a character as to suggest a derivation from the object to which it was attached rather than a specific tribute. In the Oak Grove shells the nuclear tip is in the plane of the margin and, in all but the most perfect specimens, is worn down. In Crepidula aesop the nuclear shell tips the high free beak.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities ?2646P, ?5632r, ?5631r.

Outside occurrence: Pliocene, Caloosahatchee marl,
Shell Creek, Fla.
Crepidula plana Say
Plate LVII, figures 25, 26?
1822. Crepidula plana Say, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour., 1st ser., vol. 2, p. 226.
1846. Calyptraea (Crepidula) lamina H. C. Lea, Am. Phil. Soc. Trans., new ser., vol. 9, p. 250, pi. 35, fig. 42.
1856. Crypta plana (Say). Tuomey and Holmes, Pleiocene fossils of South Carolina, p. Ill, pi. 25, fig. 12.
1858. Crepidula plana Say-. Emmons, Kept, of North Carolina Geol. Survey, p. 276, fig. 195.
1863. Crypta (Crepidula) plana ? Say. Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 569.
1864. Crypta plana Say?. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., No. 183, p. 16.
1889. Crepidula protea D'Orbigny. Dall, Blake Repts., Mollusca, pt. 2, Gastropoda and Scaphopoda, Harvard Coll., Mus. Comp. Zool. Bull., vol. 18, p. 285.
1892. Crepidula plana Say. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 358.
1904. Crepidula plana Say. Martin. Maryland Geol. Survey, Miocene, p. 250, pi. 59, figs. 5a, 5b.
1906. Crepidula plana Say. Clark, Maryland Geol. Survey, Pliocene and Pleistocene, p. 190, pi. 51, figs. 5-8.
1908. Crepidula 'plana Say. Rogers, The shell book, p. 150, pi/ 44, fig. 2.
1909. Crepidula plana Say. Grabau and Shimer, North American index fossils, vol. 1, p. 713, figs. 1031a-b.
1911. Crepidula plana Say. Brown and Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1910, p. 360.
1919. Crepidula plana Say. Gardner and Aldrich, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1918, p. 18 (check list, name only).
1922. Crepidula plana Say. Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1921, pt. 2, p. 385.
1922. Crepidula plana Say. Olsson, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 9, no. 39, p. 159.
1930. Crepidula plana Say. Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 116.
1937. Crepidula plana Say. Maxwell Smith, Bast coast marine shells, p. 96, pi. 36, fig. 14, pi. 68, fig. 12 (radula) ; pi. 69, fig. 26.
Shell depressed, flat, oblong oval, transversely wrinkled, lateral margins abruptly deflected; apex not prominent, and constituting a mere terminal angle, obsolete in the old shells; within white; diaphragm occupying half the length of the shell, convex, contracted in the middle and at one side.
Length 1 and 1-10 of an inch. Inhabits the coast of the United States. Cabinet of the Academy and Philadelphia Museum. A remarkably distinct species, the surface of the shell is flat, and sometimes slightly concave. The young shell is generally orbicular, and gradually becomes proportionally more elongated 'as it increases in size. I have found it on the coasts of Maryland, Carolina, Georgia and East Florida, and my brother, Mr. Benjamin Say, discovered it on the shores of New Jersey. Say, 1822.
Two individuals from locality 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, are figured in this report. One of them (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136061) is 37.5 millimeters long and 20.5 millimeters wide and displays the characteristic features of the species. The other (U. S. Nat.

566 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Mus. No. 350470) is warped to a length of only 22 millimeters and a width of 20 millimeters. The latter may more properly be referable to C. fornicata.
Shell rather thin for the genus, flattened or feebly concave, often a little twisted. Apex marginal, central or slightly dextral, commonly inflated. Protoconch small, smooth, polished, of about 1-% volutions, coiled in a single plane and opening like a trumpet. Growth lines conspicuous; faint radial striations may be present but no true sculpture developed. Internal lamina straight or a little convex at the margin, covering approximately half the aperture. Free edge of septum feebly contracted medially.
Though Dall considered Crepidula plana Say as nothing more than a dynamic mutant, it is so readily isolated by the peculiarities of its outline that it seems unnecessary to deprive it of specific rank without definite proof that the diagnostic outline, and, in the Recent species, the absence of color markings are due merely to situs and cannot be inherited. Even the protoconch seems to have been affected by the narrow confines of its habitat, as it is a little smaller relatively and more flattened than in C. fornicata. The species is very common in the Recent seas, and there is no apparent reason why the permanence of its characters should not be made a subject for experimentation rather than speculation. Fulgur and Polinices were the most popular lodging houses for the Crepidula plana of the east coast later Tertiary period.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212?, 2213C, 2564?, 3419r, 2211?; Oak Grove sand, localities 2646?, 5632r, 5633r, 7054r ; Shoal River formation, localities 3856?, 3742r.
Outside occurrence: Miocene: Calvert formation, Maryland; Choptank formation, Maryland; St. Marys formation, Maryland-Virginia; Yorktown formation, Virginia-North Carolina; Duplin marl, North Carolina-South Carolina; Choctawhatchee formation (Ecphora and Cancellaria zones), Florida. Pliocene: Waccamaw formation, North Carolina-South Carolina; Nashua marl, Florida; Caloosahatchee formation, Florida; Croatan formation, North Carolina. Pleistocene: Massachusetts to Florida. Recent: Prince Edward Island to Bahia, Brazil, in shallow waters. Dredged by the Woods Hole Survey in 2 to 25 fathoms

on various bottoms. Most commonly found inside shells occupied by hermit crabs, more rarely on the outside of Ostrea, Limulus, and some other shells.
Genus CRTTCIBULT7M Schtunacher
1817. Crucibulum Schumacher, Essai d'un nouveau syst&me des habitations des vers testaces, pp. 56, 182.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 157, November 1847) : Patella auriculata of Chemnitz and Dillwyn = Patella auricula Gmelin = Crucibulum planum Schumacher.
Herrmannsen's earlier designation in March, 1847, is invalid for "Galyptraea Chinensis Linn." is not one of the two species first mentioned by Schumacher.
Shell limpetlike, sub conic, rarely spiral, with central or subcentral nucleus. Sculpture dominantly radial. Incremental corrugations commonly pronounced. Adductor muscles attached to a funnelshaped process, adherent by the apex alone, by a lateral seam along the left wall, or by a considerable part of the wall.
Although the animal retains the power of locomotion, it rarely exercises it and accepts as a permanent abode the situs upon which it has perched early in life. The resulting adaptive characters account for the wide range of variation within a single species.
Crucibulum is common in the Miocene and Pliocene formations of the east coast. The Recent representatives, the so-called "cup and saucer limpets", occur on both the east and west coasts in considerable abundance and are recorded from the Indian Ocean and the China Sea. The species range widely, as a rule, in time and place and vary with their location to such an extent that determinations cannot be made with any degree of assurance from the outline or the external sculpture.
In the distribution of the genus in the Alum Bluff group, however, the three horizons are well defined. Of the six species only one is represented in all three formations. Two are common to the Oak Grove sand and Shoal River formation, a third is a later Miocene species questionably present in the Oak Grove sand; each of the three remaining species is clearly restricted to a single horizon.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

567

Internal cup adherent in adult by lateral seam.............................................. Crucibulum chipolanum Ball s. 1. Radials usually exceeding 35 in number at their initiation...................................... C. chipolanum Ball, s. s. Radials rarely exceeding 32 in number at their initiation........................ C. chipolamim dodmieum Gardner, n. subsp.
Internal cup adherent over a part of the wall: Radial sculpture not developed over any part of the shell: Apex subcentral: Cup adherent over one-sixth to one-tenth of its surface .................... Crucibulum waltonense Gardner, n. sp. Cup adherent over approximately one-third of its surface. ...... .Cricubulum constrictum conjuge Gardner, n. subsp. Apex well within the posterior half of the shell. .......................................... Crucibulum grande (Say). Radial sculpture developed over a part or the whole of the shell: Radials not spinose: Cup adherent over one-sixth to one-tenth of its surface.................... Crucibulum ^oaltonense Gardner, n. sp. Cup adherent over approximately one-third of its surface...... Crucibulum constrictum conjuge Gardner, n. subsp. Radials spinose over a whole or a part of the shell.............................'.. Crucibulum muUillneatiim (Conrad).

Crucibulum chipolanum Dall
' Plate LVI, figures 10, 11
1892. Crucibulum auriculum var. chipolanum Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 349.
Shell with sharply cut radiating threads and riblets, rarely dichotomous, stronger than in the typical form, yet not reaching the strength of the ribs in. C. costatum. From the older Miocene of the Chipola River, a mile below Baileys Ferry, Burns. All the specimens from this horizon appear to have this particular sculpture, which otherwise would hardly 'have authorized the application to them of even a varietal distinctive name. Dall, 1892.
Dimensions of cotype: Height, 4.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 12.9 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 10.8 millimeters.
Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 14.5 millimeters; diameter, 24.5 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 19.5 millimeters.
Cotypes: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112782. Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. 112783.
Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Figured specimen from No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.
Shell of medium size and height. Peritreme subcircular or somewhat compressed laterally, commonly irregular. Apex submedial, in line with the area of attachment. Protoconch small, smooth, highly polished, coiled in a single plane of 1-% or 2 volutions, the first half turn largely immersed, the succeeding coil evenly inflated; inclined to the right when the attached area of the inner cup is held upward facing the observer. Surface in apical region smooth; sculpture initiated rather abruptly, with about 40 somewhat irregularly cordate radials separated by sharply cut linear interspaces; this number increased by intercalation and bifurcating so that it is often more than doubled at the periphery; general character of radials constant from origin to base. Peripheral margin crenulated in harmony with the sculpture. Cup rather small, pyriform in the adult and attached by a posterior seam; area of attachment much wider in the

young, the cup being commonly adnate over a third or more of the parietal wall.
Dall considered Crucibulum chipolanum a subspecies of C. auriculum, but the protoconchs are dissimilar; that of C. auriculum is much broader and more flattened and performs but little more than a single complete volution. The differences in the sculpture are more obvious though of less systematic value.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212C, 2213C, 2564r, 3419?, 7151P, 221F.
Crucibulum chipolanum dodoneum Gardner, n. subsp.
Plate LVI, figures 18-20
Shell moderately large and heavy, conical, the base rudely circular and irregularly oval. Apex submedial, in line with the area of attachment of the inner cup. Nucleus smooth, polished, coiled in a single plane, a minute cornucopia of a little more than two complete volutions. Sculpture exceedingly variable; in many individuals, as in the type, including 25 to 30 vigorous radials abruptly initiated at the beginning of the conch, increasingly stronger toward the periphery and 50 to 100 per cent more numerous; interradials sharply grooved. Peripheral margin crenate in the thinner individuals, simple in the heavier. Internal cup not quite half so high as the entire shell; pyriform; in the fully adult, adnate by a posterior seam but adnate in the young over a considerable portion of the parietal surface.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 13 millimeters; maximum diameter, 25 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 20 millimeters. Dimensions of larger but less perfect individual: Height, 21.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 35.5 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 25.7 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350451. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. Crucibulum chipolanum dodoneum is separated from its Chipola analog by the tendency toward the larger, coarser shell and the consistently coarser sculpture.

568 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

The sculpture is paralleled in some of the (7. auriculum, Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River,

but the nucleus of the Recent species is more flattened, Walton County, Fla.

less evenly inflated, initially immersed, and performs Crucibulum waltonense suggests C. chipolanum and

but little more than a single volution.

its subspecies dodoneum in the general type of sculp-

Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646a, 5632C, ture, but it differs from them in the usually later ini-

5631r, 5630P, 5633C, 7054P, 9961P; Shoal River forma- tiation of the radial sculpture, the relatively larger

tion, localities ?5184r, 5079? (juveniles), ?3733r.

cup, and its wider area of adhesion.

The species is limited in its distribution to the Shoal

Section "DISPOTAEA" auctores
The section Dispotaea Say (Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, Jour., vol. 4, p. 131, 1824) has been commonly

River beds. Though not so abundant nor so widespread as (7. constrictum conjuge it is far from rare at the single horizon.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856C,

used for those species in which an appreciable part 3742% ?5079r, 5193r.

of the cup, possibly a third or more, is adherent to the

body wall. Say described the "genus" Dispotaea as

Crucibulum constrictum conjuge Gardner, n. subsp.

follows: "Shell univalve, conoidal, patelliform, with an internal entire cup-shaped appendage, adhering by its side and apex to the side of the shell." From this description alone, the extent of the area of attachment is not clear. He listed two species, a Recent form from South America, whether from the east or the west coast is not stated, and Calyptraea costata Say, 1820. I have been unable to identify the Recent species from South America, and there is some doubt about the type locality and determination of the unfigured C. costata. The
strongly costate individuals from the Yorktown and St. Marys formations, which have been commonly referred to costata, are attached only along a seam, and Dispotaea thus becomes a synonym of Crucibulum s.s. In fact Dall has considered C. costata as nothing more than a varietal form of the genotype of Crucibulum s.s.
The following species are characterized by the adhesion in the adult stage of a considerable part of the cup to the body wall.

Plate LVI, figures 14, 15
Shell of medium size, moderately high, slightly ovate, a little narrower as a rule at the posterior end than at the anterior. Peritreme usually regular. Nucleus dextral, minute, polished, the two volutions coiled in a single plane. Surface of conch generally smooth except for incremental and microscopically fine, irregular radial striae; undulatory radials may be developed over a whole or part of the surface; radials when present overridden by the incrementals, which appear as fine, sharp, overlapping lamellae. Margin entire except in the most ornate individuals. Cup moderately large, adnate to the posterior wall of the shell over about a third of the cup surface; posterior angle between cup wall and shell approximately 90°; anterior angle very small.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 9.2 millimeters; maximum diameter, 16.7 millimeters; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 14.2 millimeters.

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371874.

Crucibulum waltonense Gardner, n. sp.

Type locality: No. 3732, Dave Adams Mill Creek,

Plate LVI, figures 16, 17

sec. 2, T. 3 N., R. 21 W., Walton County, Fla. Crucibulum constrictum conjuge is intermediate in

Shell of moderate size and inclined to be high and its characters between the true C. constrictum (pi.

warped. Apex slightly posterior, in line with the area LVI, figs. 8, 9, 21, 22) and (7. waltonense. From the

of attachment of the inner cup. Nucleus small, smooth, former it differs in the consistently smaller area of

polished, planorbiform, a little more than twice coiled; attachment of the cup, from the latter in the larger

initial turn largely immersed; succeeding volution in- area of attachment and the strong tendency toward

flated, dextral. Early part of conch usually smooth an obsolete sculpture. It is quite possibly a direct

except for incrementals or irregularly corrugated. ancestor of C. constrictum, and may be related to (7.

True sculpture abruptly established in the form of 40 waltonense, probably along a lateral line. The range

(in the type) irregular, cordate costals that either of variation in sculpture is parallel to that exhibited

persist to the base or disappear to be replaced by by C. constrictum. The group as a whole is puzzling.

others; intercalations and diastomosing common. Pe- The nuclear characters are the same in all three races,

riphery finely crenulated by the radials. Cup rather and the species have been separated almost entirely by

large, more than half as high as the shell, pyriform, the degree of adhesion of the cup. This is always rela-

adnate to the posterior wall by one-eighth to one-tenth tively greater in the young than in the adult, bu^ it is

of its surface.

usually constant through a given species at a given

Dimensions of holotype: Height, 14 millimeters; stage of development.

maximum diameter, 25.5 millimeters; diameter at right The subspecies is the most widespread and abundant

angles to maximum diameter, 23 millimeters.

Crucibulum within the Shoal River marls, but it is

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371873.

restricted in its range to the single horizon.

CTENOBRANOHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANOHIA, AND SOAPHOPODA

569

Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856P, 3732r, 3742C, 5080r, 5184r, 9958», 9960», 9959».
Crucibulum grande (Say)
Plate LVI, figures 12, 13 .
1824. Calyptraea grandis Say, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour., 1st ser., vol. 4, p. 130, pi. 7, figs. 6a, 6b.
1854. Crucibulum ffrandis Say. Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 7, p. 30.
1892. Crucibulum grande Say. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 351.
Ovate; internal appendage dilated, and attached to the side of the shell.
Shell large, ovate at base, inequilateral, concentrically wrinkled, destitute of spines or processes: apex behind the middle nearly erect; internal appendage transverse, patulous, occupying a considerable portion of the cavity of the shell, and attached by one side, from its summit to its edge, to the shorter side of the shell, its summit corresponding to the inner apex of the shell. Say, 1824.
Type locality: One of the Finch collection, presumably from "Maryland" but more probably from northern Virginia.
Crucibulum grande (Say) is characterized by its large size, erect or only slightly inclined apex and the absence of any but incremental sculpture. Crucibulum constrictum (Conrad), may approximate it in size, but the area of adhesion in the cup is more restricted and the posterior angle between the adherent and the free margins is much lower.
Two half-grown individuals and half a dozen younger shells were collected at Oak Grove that differ in no essential character from the Miocene species of the Middle Atlantic States. The rather heavy, unsculptured shell, the posterior apex, and the degree of attachment of the cup are all suggestive of C. grande. C. constrictum conjuge is usually unsculptured, but it is smaller and lighter in weight and the cup is adherent over a wider surface. However, more material must be collected before the range of C. grande can be extended downward even to the Oak Grove with any assurance.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality ?7893r ; Oak Grove sand, locality ?2646P.
Outside occurrence: Yorktown formation, Virginia and North Carolina.

1863. Crucibulum multilineatum Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 568.
1864. Crucibulwn multilineatum Conrad. Meek, Miocene check list, Smithsonian Misc. Coll. No. 183, p. 15.
1892. Crucibulum multilineatum Conrad. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 351.
1904. Crucibulum multilineatum Conrad. Martin, Maryland Geol. Survey, Miocene, p. 246, pi. 58, figs. 12a, 12b.
1919. Crucibulum nwltilineatum Conrad. Gardner and Aidrich, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 18.
1930. Crucibulum multilineatum (Conrad). Mansfield, Florida State Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 120.
Subovate, depressed; apex prominent; one side with squamose lines, the opposite with finer ramose lines destitute of scales; diaphragm contracted. Conrad, 1841.
Type locality: Natural Well, 2 miles southwest of Magnolia, Duplin County, N. C. The individual figured (Johns Hopkins University) is from the Choptank formation at Jones Wharf, St. Marys County, Md. It is 7 'millimeters high and 30 millimeters in diameter.
Shell small, capuloid, moderately low, subcircular or elliptical in basal outline. Protoconch dextral, performing two minute volutions in a single plane. Radial scupture variable, usually 15 to 20 cordate costae originating a short distance away from the apex and obliquely radiating from it, some or all of which bear minute tubular spines; secondary radials commonly ramifying and intersecting the primaries at an angle of 10° to 25°. Inner cup adherent posteriorly over about a third of its, surface; dextral portion of free margin contracted with a peculiar, characteristic little kink.
Cruoibulum multilineatum (Conrad) is readily isolated from the other members of the section characterized by the adherent cup, by the spinose, more or less oblique primary radials, the ramose secondary radials, and the diagnostic contraction of the posterior portion of the inner cup.
The species is fairly widespread through the Oak Grove and Shoal River.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 7893p ; Oak Grove sand, localities 3386?, 3385?, 7148a, 2646a, 5632P. Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 2645r, ?3732r, 3742P, 5079P, 5193r .
Outside occurrence: Miocene. Duplin marl, North Carolina, South Carolina. Choctawhatchee formation, Cancellaria zone of northern Florida.

Crucibulum multilineatum (Conrad)

Family CAPUTJDAE Genus CAPULTTS Montfort

Plate LVI, figures 6, 7
1841. Dispotoea multilineta Conrad, Am. Jour. Sci., 1st ser., vol. 41, p. 346, pi. 2, fig. 8.
1845. Dispotoea multilineata Conrad, Fossils of the medial Tertiary of the United States, p. 80.
1856. Crucibulum multilineata Conrad. Tuomey and Holmes, Pleiocene fossils of South Carolina, p. 107, pi. 25, fig. 7.
1858V Crucibulum multilineatum Conrad. Emmons, Rept. of North Carolina Geol. Survey, p. 276, fig. 192.

1810. Capulus Montfort, Conchyliologie systematique, vol. 2, pp. 54, 55.
Type by monotypy: Patella ungarica Linnaeus. Recent in the European seas.
Shell obliquely conical. Apex posterior and posteriorly directed, more or less incurved. Nucleus small, smooth, paucispiral, dextrally coiled. Sculpture radial, concentric or reticulate. Peritreme oval or subcircular,

570 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

not reflected nor interrupted but commonly more or

Family HIPPONIdDAE

less distorted by the object to which the individual was attached. Muscle impressions two, symmetrically placed and forming with the pallial line a horseshoe with slightly expanded arms. Shelly pad not secreted as in Hipponiae.
The genus is venerable even as geologic ages go, for it has been reported from the mid-Paleozoic. Though never prolific it has been much more tenacious than most of its contemporaries, for it still survives in restricted numbers in the seas of today.

Genus CHEILEA Modeer
1793. Cheilea Modeer, Kongliga Svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Nya Handlingar, Band 14, pp. 110-111.
Type by subsequent designation (Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 374, 1928) : Patella equestris Linnaeus. Recent from Hatteras to the Barbados.
Modeer, as pointed out by Dall,23a was the first to attempt a logical subdivision of Linnaeus' heterogenous Patella. He segregated the true limpets under Patella,

Capulus chipolanus Gardner, n. sp.

and to those developing shelly internal processes, he gave the name Cheilea. In the subsequent division of

Plate LVII, figures 22, 23

the group Modeer's name was lost until resurrected

Shell very small and rather light, obliquely conical. Apex posterior but not marginal, posteriorly directed. Protoconch small, smooth, polished, turned sharply to the right when the shell is oriented so that the aperture faces the observer; performing between 1% and 2 volutions. Surface of conch sculptured with 25 to 45 primary radials; secondaries rather regularly introduced in the iuterradial spaces. Incremental sculpture strong, minutely imbricated, not overriding the radials except at the resting stages but sufficient to finely creuate them and to give to the entire sculpture an ir-

by Dall and substituted for the Mitndaria of Schumacher, 1817.
Shell limpet-shaped, conical; the apex subcentral or slightly posterior. Nucleus paucispiral. Sculpture dominantly radial. Internal septa central, scoopshaped, attached only at the apex, the concave surface anteriorly directed.
The genus has not been previously recorded from the east coast in strata older than the Pliocene. The recent species are widely distributed in the temperate and tropical seas.

regular, granulose aspect. Peritreme slightly thickened

Cheilea dryas (Dall ms.) Gardner, n. sp.

and only feebly affected by the radial ornamentation, broadly and evenly arcuate in front, more or less broadly constricted behind. Interior smooth, devoid of processes. Muscle scars indistinct, submedial, forming with the pallial line a horseshoe with expanded arms.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 4.5 millimeters; maximum diameter of base, 3.7 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 3.2 millimeters; maximum diameter of base, 2.6 millimeters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329059. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Capulus chipolanus suggests most strongly Hipponiao pygmaeus Lea of the Eocene, but it is much less solid, and more strongly and evenly inflated. The revolute apex is more posterior, the primaries stronger, less numerous, and better differentiated and the secondaries more regularly intercalated. Both of the Tampa species of Hipponix, H. willcoxii Dall and H. tampensis Mansfield, are larger and more strongly and coarsely sculptured than Capulus chipolanus. The species is assigned to Capulus rather than Hipponix because of its relatively thin shell and gyrate apex. Previous citations of the genus from the Tertiary are rather dubious, and most of the species are referable to other genera. None of the Eecent capulids are closely related to C. chipolanus, although it resembles them in general outline and ornamental characters.

Plate LVII, figures 20, 21
Shell of moderate size for the genus, rather low, conic. Periphery subcircular to ovate; regular. Apex obtuse, slightly posterior, posteriorly inclined. Nucleus worn but apparently small, smooth, and polished and performing between 1 and 2 complete volutions. Surface uniformly sculptured from apical region to periphery with very fine and somewhat irregular radial lirae numbering 5 or 6 to the millimeter and separated from one another by linear sulci. Incremental sculpture manifested in the minute, irregular jogs and wavelets in the radials; a few of the resting stages so strongly marked that the surface is corrugated and the profile broken. Inner process slightly higher than the shell, scoop-shaped, attached by its smaller end to the posterior and lateral walls; the concave surface toward the front; the ventral extremity slightly imperfect but apparently with only a feeble medial depression.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 11 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371877. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. The genus is represented in the Alum Bluff group by the unique type. Cheilea dryas is lower and more symmetrical than the type of the genus, C. equestris (Linnaeus) of the later

Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.

% Dall, W. H., Nautilus, vol. 14, p. 44, 1900.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

571

Tertiary and Kecent faunas. It differs further in the regular peritreme, in the finer and nonspinose radial sculpture, and in the higher inner process very much more feebly depressed on its ventral surface.
The unique type was determined and named by Dr. Dall, of the National Museum, but no description or figure was published.
Occurrence: Shoal Kiver formation, locality 3742r.
Superfamily AMALTHBACEA
Family FOSSARIDAE
Genus FOSSABTJS PhUippi
1841. Fossarus. Philippi, Archiv fur Natiirgeschichte, year 7, vol. 1, pp. 42, 47.
1844. Fossarus Philippi, Fauna molluscorum Siciliae, vol. 2, 1>. 147.
Type by monotypy: Fossarus adansonii Philippi= Helix ambigua Linnaeus. Recent off the coast of Senegal and in the Mediterranean (fide Pilsbry).
Shell perforate, subglobose. Spire low, of few volutions; body whorl relatively large. Sculpture dominantly spiral. Aperture entire, semicircular. Outer lip strongly arcuate, scalloped by the spiral ridges. Parietal wall heavily calloused. Columellar margin thickened, oblique, reverted anteriorly. Umbilical opening funicular.
The representation of Fossarus is meager throughout the Tertiary, and the Kecent species are confined, for the most part, to the warmer waters.
In the Alum Bluff group Fossarus is so rare at even the few localities at which it is present that its distribution is without significance.
Fossarus chipolanus (Dall)
Plate LVII, figure 29
1892. Cyclostrema chipolanum Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 420, pi. 22, fig. 35.
Shell small, turbinate, with three or four rounded whorls; nucleus small, smooth, subsequent whorls sculptured with (between the sutures three) eight prominent spiral ribs with wider channeled interspaces crossed by well-marked lines of growth which are occasionally almost lamellose; suture distinct, not channeled, though the whorl in front of it is a little tabulated by the upper spiral rib; basal surface sculptured like the spire; aperture circular, expanded at the margin; pillar lip thin; the space between it and the lowest spiral rib is excavated, but there is no umbilical perforation. Altitude of shell 2.25; diameter 2.3 millimeters.
This is a well-marked and characteristic little shell, notable for its bold, strong yet simple sculpture. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U: S. Nat. Museum No. 112660. Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. The umbilicus was choked with matrix, which entirely concealed the small but very deep pit. The type is unique. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2212r.
695462 47 6

Fossarus florins Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figure 30
Shell small, solid, subglobose. Spire relatively high for the genus, the height of the aperture, however, more than half the total height. Whorls about 3% in all. Initial half turn moderately inflated, immersed at the tip, doubled sharply back within the succeeding and final turn of the protoconch, which is obtusely shouldered and broadly convex. The two postnuclear turns increasing rapidly in size; obtusely shouldered, broadly convex laterally. Base of body smoothly and rather abruptly constricted. Surface spirally banded with flattened or broadly rounded fillets equal in size and spacing; 4, rarely 3, on the final whorl of the spire and double that number on the body; interspiral areas of approximately the same width as the spiral, minutely punctated by the incremental laminae. Sutures deeply impressed but not channeled, coincident with the fifth spiral. Aperture rather small for the genus, obliquely elliptical. Peristome continuous. Outer lip obscurely angulated at the shoulder, expanding .slightly in front, crenulated at the margin in harmony with the external sculpture. Inner lip oblique, adnate to the body wall over a space the width of 3 spirals and 2 interspiral areas; reinforced anteriorly. Anterior extremity of aperture smoothly rounded. Umbilicus small, twisted, its outer margin defined by the anterior of the 8 spirals.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 2.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371866. Type locality: Sta. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Eiver, Walton County, Fla. The individual from Oak Grove referred to this species may prove, with the acquisition of further material, to be distinct. It is a larger shell and contains one more volution than the usual F. florius. It is possible that it may be the only fully adult specimen, but all of the Shoal Kiver forms are of approximately the same size and none show any evidence of immaturity. With the exception of the single individual in question, the species is restricted in its known distribution to the Shoal Biver formation. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, locality ?2646r ; Shoal Kiver formation, localities 3856r, 3742r, 5079r, 3733r.
Superfamily GYMNOGLOSSA
Family PYBAMIDET.LIDAE
Paul Bartsch, Honorary Associate Curator of Mollusca of the U. S. National Museum, is monographing the Pyramidellidae.
Genus ISELICA Dall
1854. Isapis H. and A. Adams, Genera Recent Mollusca, vol. 1, p. 320.

572 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

1918. Iselica Dall, Biol. Soc. Washington Proe.. vol. 31, p. 137. Substitute name for Isapis H. and A. Adams, 1854, not Doubleday, 1847 (Lepidoptera).
1929. Iselica Dall. Thiele, Handbuch der Systematischen Weichtierkunde, vol. 1, p. 233. Considered a section under Phasianema.
Type by monotypy: Narica? anomala C. B. Adams. Recent in Jamaican waters.
The genotype is spirally banded like Fossarns but was separated from it because of the development of a single nearly horizontal colnmellar fold opposite the umbilicus.
The status of the genus is not clear. "Fossarus (Iselica) obtusa" Carpenter, a Eecent species ranging from Monterey to the Gulf of California is strikingly similar to the new species from the Chipola formation. Some of the individuals of Carpenter's species in the collections of the U. S. National Museum retained the soft parts. The radulas of several of these specimens were examined by Dr. J. P..E. Morrison of the U. S. National Museum. He found them to be characteristic of the Pyramidellidae, the family to which Thiele had referred Iselica. The study of the radulas of other species, particularly of the genotype, should be made, for the West Coast species differs rather markedly from the genotype, Iselica anomala.
Iselica psila Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figures 27, 28
Shell small and relatively thin, subglobose. Aperture about three-fourths as high as the entire shell. Whorls only 3 in all, rapidly increasing in size. Protoconch very small, moderately inflated, of less than one complete volution; immersed at the tip. Earliest whorl of conch broadly convex at the beginning, gradually flattening posteriorly into a horizontal shoulder, which becomes increasingly broad toward the aperture. Body well-rounded, expanding rapidly. Sculpture obscure; 1 to 3 exceedingly faint sulci symmetrically spaced on the final whorl of the spire of the holotype. Body sculptured with a faintly suggested shoulder lira and, as a rule, a sulcus near the periphery or a little in front of it; a sulcus or a feeble lira about halfway between the shoulder and the median sulcus; other lirae and striations fortuitously developed. Aperture semielliptical, the labium dividing the basal oval into two unequal parts, of which the apertural is the larger. Outer lip thin, sharp, obscurely angulated at the shoulder, arcuate medially, broadly rounded in front. Labium slightly oblique, adnate to the body wall from the periphery to the obscure umbilical keel, reinforced along the umbilical face. Umbilicus small, open; umbilical keel obtuse.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.0 millimeters; diameter, 2.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329026.

Type locality: No. 3419, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoim County, Fla.
Iselica psila varies rather widely in the details of the obscure ornamentation and in the size of the umbilical opening.
An individual from the type locality similar in outline and apertural characters and probably nothing more than an end member of I. psila exhibits a body sculpture of 5 moderately impressed sulci, microscopically punctated by the incrementals.
Nothing very close to Iselica psila has been recognized in either the Tertiary or the Recent faunas of the Atlantic, although a Recent West Coast species, "Fossarus (Iselica) obtusa" of Carpenter, is remarkably like it in form and in the obscure sculpture pattern.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2564r, 3419P.
Iselica myttonis (Maury)
1910. Isapis Myttonis Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 28, pi. 7, fig. 4.
Shell with five convex whorls ornamented with a beautiful cancellation formed by the crossing of the raised spiral bands and the longitudinal riblets. Number of spiral bands on the whorl preceding the last, three, on the last whorl seven. These are crossed somewhat obliquely by less prominent longitudinal riblets and are slightly nodular at the intersections. Suture distinct; spire acute; aperture oval; outer lip simple, crenulated within by the seven revolving elevated bands of the exterior ; columella arched, bearing within a single central tooth. Length of shell 8; of aperture 3; greatest width 4 millimeters.
This exquisite little shell is entirely distinct from /. dalli Whitfield of the Miocene of New Jersey.
Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Florida. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
This species is closely related to Isapis anomala C. B. Adams described from Jamaican waters, but the earlier form is more slender and contains a greater number of whorls, the spirals are narrower, and the axial laminae less prominent than in Adams' /. anomala.
Iselica myttonis (Maury) is very rare and when found, is usually in a more or less battered condition.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213r, 3419r, Cornell University collection.
Family MEIiANEMJDAE
Genus STROMBIFORMIS Da Costa
1778. Strombiformis Da Costa, British cdnchology, p. 107.
Type by subsequent designation (Iredale, Malacol. Soc. London Proc., vol. 11, p. 293,1915) : Strombiformis glaber Da Costa =Turbo subulatus Donovan fi&e Jeffreys. Recent from the British Isles to the Mediterranean.
These shells have nothing to do with -Strombus, the giant conch, but are the "needle shells," named from the Greek word meaning a spindle. They are exceedingly slender little forms with long-drawn-out spires

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

573

and bodies, a narrow lobate aperture, and a reflected and closely appressed inner lip. The Eecent shells are banded in color.
Strombiformis scotti (Maury)
Plate LV, figure 17
1910. .EuUma scotti Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4; No. 21, p. 30, pi. 7, fig. 12.
Shell very slender, acute, polished, about nine-whorled; sides of spire straight; suture visible only with a lens; outer lip thin; inner lip with a well-marked bandlike callus.
Length of shell 8.5; of aperture 2; greatest width 2 mm. Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Florida. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 7.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.7 millimeters.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498017. Type locality: Baileys Ferry, Chipola Biver, Callioun County, Fla. Strombiformis scotti (Maury) is the most slender of the described species of Strombiformis with the exception of 8. ischna from the Shoal Biver formation. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r, Cornell University Collection.
Strombiformis ischna Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 16
Shell small, exceedingly slender, smooth and highly polished. Protoconch slender, paucispiral, probably including not more than the partially immersed tip and the two glassy and feebly inflated succeeding turns. Line between conch and protoconch not certainly determined. Whorls 11 to 12 in all, increasing regularly but very slowly in diameter but less slowly in height. Sutures appearing not as lines but as feebly depressed bauds, a little less opaque than the intermediate areas. Body attenuated, smoothly and gently rounded at the base. Aperture narrow, deltoid, grooved and angulated posteriorly, patulous anteriorly. Outer lip thin, sharp, almost vertical, rounding broadly into the anterior end, not sinuated in front of the suture. Inner lip oblique, reverted, feebly constricted in the umbilical area, the callus not fused with the parietal wall, widest and heaviest at the umbilicus, which it completely closes; margin of lip in front of the umbilicus slightly thickened, free, rounding abruptly into the narrow anterior extremity.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 7.5 millimeters; diameter, 1.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498019. Type locality: No. 5079, y2 mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal Biver, Walton County, Fla. The type is unique. The excessively slender outline is sufficient to isolate the species from all of its Alum Bluff associates. Strombiformis leonensis Mansfield from the Gancel-

laria zone of the Choctawhatchee formation, has the same general aspect, but it is a less elegant shell and the whorls are less numerous than in S. ischna.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation* locality 5079r.
Subgenus POLYGIREULIMA Sacco
1892. Polygireulima Sacco, Molluschi dei terreni terziarii del Piemonte e della Liguria, pt. 11, p. 10.
Type by original designation: Melania spina Grateloup. Lower and middle Miocene of southern France.
There may well be some earlier name for the less slender, nonarcuate, and polygyrate melanelids. Several of the better known names seem, however, to be unavailable.
The type by monotypy of Melanetta Bowdich,24 according to the illustration, is a strongly flexed shell, Melanella dufresnii Bowdich.
Risso25 proposed Eulima and cited four species, E. elegantissima Montagu and Donovan, E. glaberrima Allan, E. striata Brocchi, and E. subulata Brocchi. The first type designation that I have noted is that of Herrmannsen,26 who cited Turbo subulatus Donovan, 1803, which Sacco considers synonymous with Helix subulata Brocchi, 1814. Donovan's T. subulatus is the type of Strombiformis Da Costa, 1778, and also of Subularia Monterosato, 1884. Acicularia Monterosato, 1884, is preoccupied by Acicularia Archiac, 1843.
Strombiformis (Polygireulima?) chipolana (Maury)
Plate LV, figure 18
1910. EuUma chipolatia Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol.
4. No. 21, p. 30, pi. 7, fig. 9.
Shell elongated, very slender, highly" polished and shining, smooth, whorls thirteen; the five nearest the apex inclining slightly from the main axis of the shell; aperture oval; outer lip simple, inner lip reflexed upon the columella.
Length of shell 9; greatest width 2 mm. Chipola Oligocene, Baileys Ferry, Florida.' Cornell University collection. Maury/1910.
Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 8 millimeters; diameter, 2 millimeters.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498016. Locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. The inflection of the earlier whorls is barely perceptible. The numerous narrow, very feebly inflated whorls of the spire and the short, rounded body characterize the species. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r, Cornell University collection.
24 Bowdich, T. E., Elements of conchology, p. 27, pi. 6, fig. 17, 1822. 25 Risso, Antoine, Histoire naturelle des principales productions de 1'Europe meridionale, vol. 4, p. 123, 1826. 26 Herrmannsen, A. N., Indicis generum malacozoorum, vol. 1, p. 431, 1847.

574 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Strombiformis (Polygireulima?) parasitos (Maury)
1910. Eulima parasitos Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 30, pi. 7, fig. 10.
Shell very slender, small, smooth and polished, with seven whorls exclusive of the eroded nucleus; without sculpture.
Length of shell 4; greatest width 1 mm. Oak Grove, Florida. Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
Strombiformis parasitos seems from the illustrations to have much iu common with 8. chipolana but apparently it is shorter and relatively stouter. It has not been recognized in the later collections.
Strombiformis (Polygireulima) defuniak Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 15
Shell small, moderately slender, smooth and polished. Spire a flat-sided, evenly and acutely tapering cone. Body short, the base obliquely truncate. Whorls 9 to 10 in all, the sutures exceedingly obscure, more so than might be supposed from the figure. Protoconch smooth and paucispiral, but the exact number of whorls not distinguishable. Aperture obliquely lobate, angulated and faintly grooved at the posterior commissure. Outer lip sinuated posteriorly, flaring forward medially and patulous anteriorly. Inner lip reverted, glazing the parietal wall, the callus free and sharp-edged in the umbilical region, with a narrow groove behind it. Anterior extremity narrow, the inner surface flattened slightly.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 4.5 millimeters; diameter, 1.6 millimeters.
Holotype : U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498018. Type locality: No. 5618, 3% miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, Walton County, Fla. The rostrate body whorl suggests that the unique type may be a juvenile and probably close to Strombiformis makista. The glaze on the parietal wall, however, and the character of the lip in the umbilical region bespeak maturity. The increase in the diameter of the whorls in 8. defuniak is more regular than in chipolana, and the whorls are relatively wider in the De Funiak species. Otherwise, the two forms are similar. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 5618r.
Strombiformis (Polygireulima) makista Gardner
Plate LXII, figures 6-8
1936. Melanella (Melanella) makista Gardner, Florida Dept. Cons., Geol. .Bull. 14, p. 51, pi. 10, figs. 7-9.
Shell imperforate, straight, moderately slender and rather large for the group. Pprcelaneous, highly polished, devoid of sculpture. Whorls narrow, appressed, slowly and regularly increasing in diameter, flattened laterally, slightly undercut anteriorly, probably exceeding 20 in number in the perfect adult. Body whorl

about one-third as high as the entire shell, broadly rounded at the periphery. Extreme tip not preserved and characters of protoconch not known. Faint brownish flammules, which may be the remnants of a color pattern, occasionally visible on the conch. Suture strong. Aperture obliquely lobate, acutely angulated posteriorly. Outer lip expanded and slightly pouting, not thickened, rounding smoothly into the labium, which is thickened and closely appressed against the body wall. Umbilicus entirely closed but faintly indicated by a very narrow, depressed, and arcuate area along the margin of the sharply raised and thickened basal portion of the inner lip.
Dimensions of holotype: Height (estimated), 23 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6.4 millimeters; height of aperture, 5 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 7.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.7 millimeters. Dimensions of third figured specimen showing an unusually well rounded body whorl: Height, 20 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6.0 millimeters.
Type material: Holotype, 1 juvenile paratype, and a third individual, also figured, from the same locality and probably referable to the same species, U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 483782.
Type locality: No. 3856, 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.
Strombiformis (Polygireulima) makista resembles S. magnoliana Gardner and Aldrich, from the higher Miocene of Florida and the Carolinas, in the many slowly enlarging whorls separated by conspicuous suture lines. The Alum Bluff species is the more slender, and the body whorl relatively shorter and more abruptly constricted.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3856?.
"Eulima" nemoralis Maury
1910. Eulima. nemoralis Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 30, pi. 7, fig. 11.
Shell smooth and polished, small, immature, conic, Niso-like in general form; whorls seven, the earlier slightly convex, the remainder flattened, no sculpture except a basal carina on the last whorl.
Length of shell 3; greatest width 1.5 mm. Oak Grove, Florida; Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
The illustration of Miss Maury's species does not suggest a mellanellid. It has not been recognized in the later collections, and its position is doubtful.
Genus NISO Risso
1826. Niso Risso, Histoire naturelle des principales productions de 1'Europe meridionale, vol. 4, p. 218.
Type by monotypy: Niso eburnea Risso. Pliocene (Plaisancien) of Italy.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

575

Niso resembles Melanella in its elevated spire and smooth, polished surface, but it is less slender and has a fairly large, deep, and regularly formed umbilicus.
Niso aldrichi Maury
1910. Niso Aldrichi Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 31, pi. 8, fig. 1.
Shell small, smooth, polished and shining, conic, with a rapidly tapering and acute spire: whorls nine, the first three slightly convex; the following flattened. Shell without sculpture. Suture distinct; basal keel of the last whorl sharply defined.
Length of shell 4; greatest width 2 millimeters. Oak Grove, Santa Rosa County, Florida. Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
The species has not been recognized in the later collections.
Superfamily PTENOGLOSSA Family EMTONIIDAE
Genus EPITONTCTM "Bolten" Roeding
1798. Epitonium "Bolten" Roeding, Museum Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 91.
Type by subsequent designation (Suter, Manual of New Zealand Mollusca, p. 819, 1913) : Turbo scalaris Linnaeus=$ca£ana pretiosa Lamarck. Eecent in the western Pacific.
Shell turriculate, perforate or imperforate. Whorls numerous, convex, commonly loosely coiled. Sculpture dominantly axial; axial flanges and varices prominent in many groups, usually continuous and fused at the suture; in the type species forming the only contact between the whorls. Aperture subcircular or ellipsoidal. Peristome entire, thickened or reflected.
The genus has been gradually increasing in prominence since the Triassic and is represented in the Eecent seas by some 150 to 200 species of "wentle trap" distributed from the polar regions to the tropics and from between tides to abysmal depths.
There are probably at least a dozen species included in the collections from Alum Bluff, but they are most of them new and so imperfectly preserved that only subgeneric determinations have been made. The subgenera are all recorded in the Tertiary beds of central and southern Europe.
Spiral sculpture not developed: Axials not spinose or subspinose posteriorly .............. Hyaloscala de Boury. Axials spinose or subspinose posteriorly ................. Sp-iniscala de Boury.
Spiral sculpture developed: Surface not cancellated; axials laminar and elevated: Axials relatively narrow on their summits, not honeycombed ....... ............. Ginctiscdla de Boury. Axials wide on their summits, finely honeycombed.... Crisposcala de Boury. Surface cancellated ; axials low : Axials thin and sharp, not nodose medially.......... Scalina Dall. Axials obtuse, nodose medially. .Nodiscala de Boury.

Suogenus HYALOSOALA de Boury
1890. Hyaloscala de Boury, Revision des Scalidae Miocenes et Pliocenes de Fltalie, Soc. malacologica italiana Boll.,. Vol. 14, p. 90.
Type by original designation: Scalaria clathratula Adams. Eecent in the western Atlantic from Marthas Vineyard to Key West.
Hyaloscala includes small, thin shells, usually of slender outline, made up of convex whorls separated by moderately impressed sutures, sculptured by laminar axials not fused at the sutures into a continuous series. The aperture is oval, broadening anteriorly, and the reflected inner lip completely closes the umbilical chink.
A number of species from the European Tertiary beds have been referred to this subgenus. The Eecent forms, though not numerous, have a wide distribution both in longitude and latitude.
Epitonium (Hyaloscala) sp.
A number of 'Epitonium in the Alum Bluff group have been referred to this subgenus, although the representatives are not typical HyaloscaJa. The axials are fewer and heavier than is normal for Hyarloscala, and the summits of the axials show excellent cross sections of the component laminae. These differences, however, seem less radical than the differences that separate the forms in question from Nitidoscala, a subgenus in which the axials are well fused at the sutures. In the individuals from the Alum Bluff there is no fusing; the axials, however, are commonly flexed, those at the posterior suture rather sharply toward the left, and those of the preceding whorl slightly toward the right; their extremities not fusing but dovetailing into one another at the suture line.
There are probably as many as half a dozen species represented, but all of the shells are either imperfect or immature. None of them are large, none are very stout, but there is a wide range in the degree of slenderness. The number of axials to the whorl ranges from 8 to 12. Spiral sculpture is not developed; there is no basal disk, and the umbilicus is imperforate.
The group is restricted in its distribution to the Shoal River horizon and for the most part to the environs of Summerville.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856% 3748C.
Subgenus SPINISCALA de Boury
1909. Spmiscala de Boury, Jour, conchyliologie, vol. 57, p. 257.
Type by original designation: Soalaria frondicula Wood ? subsp. Pliocene of Italy.
Spiniscala includes forms of rather low, somewhat turbinate outline made up of convex contiguous whorls, pseudotabulated by the axials, increasing rapidly in diameter and separated by deep sutures. The axials

576 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

are heavy and laminar, not crowded, prominently elevated; their summits flexed and turned toward the right, expanded posteriorly and produced into short, trigonal spines, which form a coronal about the suture. The axials behind the spines are relatively low, abutting against the corresponding axials of the preceding whorl but not fused with them. The spiral sculpture is altogether absent or reduced to microscopically fine, fortuitous striae. The base of the body is smoothly rounded and not reinforced. The aperture is ovate or subelliptical, the peristome continuous. The inner margin of the aperture is reverted, completely closing the umbilical chink.
This group, like many of the others, has not been well segregated and may have a wider distribution than is apparent from the check lists. It is certainly well represented in the middle and late Tertiary of central and southern Europe and is recorded both in the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans.
Epitonium (Spiniscala) sp.
The single individual referred to Spiniscala exhibits the characteristic features of the subgenus. It is a rather small shell made up of convex whorls that increase rapidly in diameter and are separated by deeply impressed sutures; the prominent axials are expanded and subspinose posteriorly and form a fairly well-defined shoulder. No spiral sculpture is developed, and there is no basal disk. The umbilicus is imperforate. So many of the specific characters have been lost that the form has not been named. The axials are 9 and only moderately heavy, and the spines are very short. The flexure of the summits of the costals toward the right is less marked than in the type. The apex of the individual in question is broken away, but the five remaining whorls measure 5 millimeters in height.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3748r.
Epitonium (Spiniscala) virginiae (Maury)

reflected margin of the peristome is also broadest along the labrum from the posterior spine forward to the rounded anterior extremity.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211r, Cornell University collection.
Subgenus CINCTISCALA de Boury
1909. Cinctiscala de Boury, Jour, conchyliologie, p. 258.
Type by original designation: Scalaria antillarum de Boury nom. ia'at.=Soalaria turrita Nyst 1871, not Blainville 1827.=Scalaria turricula Sowerby 1844, not Cantraine 1842. Recent in the West Indies and north to Hatteras.
Cinctiscala is characterized by the elevated, acutely tapering spire, the convex whorls separated by deeply impressed sutures, the. rather numerous, moderately elevated, commonly unequal axials, and the fine spiral threading which crowds the interaxial areas. The base of the body is smoothly rounded. There is a slight change in the character of the spiral sculpture on the base, but no other indication of a disk. The peristome is continuous, and in the subgenotype, the reverted inner margin does not entirely conceal the narrow umbilical chink.
Epitonium (Cinctiscala) sp.
Fragments varying so widely in outline and dimensions that they should probably be distributed through two if not three species are not uncommon at Summerville and Shell Bluff. Some of the individuals are exceedingly slender; others are moderately stout and taper rapidly. They have in common, however, an axial sculpture of rather heavy laminae numbering 10 or 11 to'the whorl, arranged in continuous series and fused at the sutures. The spiral sculpture is fine and crowded.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3748p, Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.

1910. Scala virginiae Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 29, pi. 7, fig. 8.
Shell small, delicate, seven-whorled: nuclear smooth and polished, subsequent whorls convex, sharply separated by a deep suture; transverse sculpture of prominent, slightly oblique, sharp-edged, lamellar varices (ten on the body-whorl) which tend to coronate the whorls; spiral sculpture of microscopic striae between the varices; aperture round.
Length of shell 3.75; greatest width 1.5 mm. Only one specimen of this pretty species was found. Chipola Oligocene, Baileys Ferry, Florida. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
The axials are posteriorly produced into short, trigonal spines that lend the coronated aspect to the whorls. The spiral striation is exceedingly fine and crowded. The base is smoothly rounded and imperforate. The aperture is broadly elliptical, the curvature of the outer lip higher than that of the inner. The

Subgenus CRISPOSCALA de Boury
1886. Crisposcala de Boury, Monographic des Scalidae, pt. I, p. 1.
Type of original designation: Scalaria crispa Lamarck, Eocene of the Paris Basin.
Coquille pourvue dans la region ombilicale, tantOt d'une perforation Men uette, tantot d'une fente quelquefois rudimentaire. mais toujours iudiquee, allongee, turbinee, munie 'de c6tes longitudinales ; la spire est allongee, turbine ; son sommet est obtus et lisse; la suture profonde est formee par la jonction des lames longitudinales; les tours sont convexes, plus ou moins aplatis au voisinage de la suture; ils sont orn£s de cotes longitudinales en formes de lames le plus souvent repli£es, anguleuses a leur partie sup6rieure et presque toujours sub6pineuses dans cette region. Le dernier tour, plus petit que la spire, a sa base convexe et est orn6 de cOtes longitudinales. II porte un cordon epais, qui entoure la region ombilicale. L'ouverture arrondie a son peristome double. La partie interne est continue, tr&s

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

577

mince et presque tourjours repliee sur la columelle. Le peristome externe est dilate et forme dans sa partie ext^rieure par la derniere lame. II est auricule a chaque extr^mite et devient etroit dans la region columellaire.
Observations: Lorsque les exemplaires sont tr&s frais, ce qui est assez rare chez les especes fossiles, la surface est orn6e de stries spirales tr&s fines et nombreuses visibles seulement a la loupe. Les lames sont egalenient couvertes d'un rSseau microscopique excessivement ele'gant, mais tres souvent detruit. Ce reseau est ordinairement form6 de losanges accoles. Si Ton etudie avec soin la structure intime des lames longitudinales, il devient tres facile de comprendre leur ornementation, mais, pour Men 1'observer, il faut employer un tr£s fort grossissement. Elles sont constitutes par des tubes accoles dont la section est rectangulaire. Si par suite de 1'usure ces tubes sont coupe's obliquement ou dans leur longueur on a des losanges ou des sortes de rigoles qui, vues a un grossissement plus faible, simulent des stries transverses. Le dessinateur a parfaitement compris et rendu ce detail pour le C. junctilaniella (pi. II, fig. 6).
Nous avons souvent remarqu6 chez les coquilles dont nous nous occupons deux formes, qui, pour chaque espece, semblent assez constantes: une normale et 1'autre plus 6troite que nous indiquons comme variety. Cette difference ne concorderait-elle pas avec les sexes? On salt en effet que chez les Scalidae ceuxci sont se'pare's. La forme 6troite se rapporterait sans doute aux individus males.
Distribution: Tel que nous le connaissons actuellement ce genre apparatt dans le tertiaire inf6rieur (Sables du Soissonnais sup£rieurs aux lignites. Etage Ypr6sien). Il est surtout d6velopp6 dans l'6ocene des environs de Paris. Les esp&ces vivantes sont fort peu. nombreuses. Ce groupe ne comprend done pour le moment qu'une vingtaine de formes. De Boury, 1886.
This excellent description has been quoted in full because it appears in a publication of limited distribution.
The subgenus is rather widely dispersed in the Eocene of central and southern Europe and northern Africa, but its presence outside of that relatively restricted area and time has not been established.
Fragments from the Chipola formation exhibit the peculiar sculpture details of Crisposcala and have been referred to that group. The differences in perfect specimens, however, might justify their separation from a subgenus seemingly so far removed in space and time.
Epitonium (Crisposcala) sp.
Fragments occur in the Chipola formation that exhibit the characteristic sculpture of the subgenus. The whorls are rather high, convex, and pseudoshouldered by the flanges of the 18 to 20 axials. The wide and flattened summits of the costals exhibit the honeycomb structure peculiar to the subgenus. The interaxial spaces are striated with linear spirals, evenly and closely packed posteriorly and arranged on the medial and anterior portions, in five groups of three spirals each.

Subgenus CLATHBUS Oken
1815. Clathrus Oken, Lehrbuch der Zoologie, pt. 1 [Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte, pt. 3, no. 1], p. 256.
Type by tautonomy: Turbo clathrus Linnaeus ===== Scalina communis Lamarck (Hanley). Recent along the European shores from Scandinavia to the Mediterranean.
Clathrus sensu stricto is unrepresented in the faunas of the Atlantic Coast.
Section N1T1DISCALA de Boury
1909. NitidiscaJn de Boury- Jour. Conchyliologie, vol. 57, p. 257.
Type by original designation: Scalaria unifasciata Sowerby. Recent in the West Indies.
The shells included under Nitidiscala are smaller and more delicate than those of Clathrus s. s.
Epitonium (Clathrus) alaquaense Mansfield
Plate LV, figure 14; plate LXII, figure 4
1935. Epitonium alaqwaense Mansfield, Florida Dept. Cons. Geol. Bull. 12, p. 40, pi. 3, fig. 12.
Shell small, moderately acute, only axially sculptured, and consisting of 2 nuclear and 6 postnuclear whorls. Nucleus slender, whorls rounded and smooth. Postnuclear whorls rapidly enlarging. Axials nearly vertical along the spire, contiguous at the sutures, 12 on.the body whorl and 9 on the preceding whorl, upright, thin on the earlier whorls and thicker on later whorls. Aperture broadly elliptical, the longitudinal axis being a little greater.
The holotype (U.S.N.M. Cat. No. 373149) measures: Length, 7% millimeters; diameter, 3 millimeters.
Epitonium (Nitidiscala) aduncum Woodring. from the Bowden formation, Jamaica, is closely allied to E. alaquaense n. sp., differing mainly from the latter in having a slimmer shell and fewer axials.
Type locality: Station 12046, Vaughan Creek, upper locality, Walton County, Florida.
Occurrence: Upper middle Miocene, Area zone [Choctawhatchee formation]. Known only at the type locality. Mansfield, 1935.
An incomplete but otherwise well-preserved speciman (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498013) was recovered from the shell marls at locality 9957, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, a horizon slightly higher than the typical Shoal River formation. The fragment, which includes little more than the two final whorls, is 7 millimeters high and 4 millimeters in maximum diameter.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 9957r.
Genus SCAUNA Conrad
1865. Scalma Conrad, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 1, p. 27. No description but Scala staminea Conrad and Scala trigintinaria Conrad listed.
1908. Ferminoscala Dall, Harvard Coll. Mus. Comp. Zoology Bull., vol. 43, no. 6, p. 315. Type by original designation : Scala ferminiana Dall (Epitonium [Ferminoscala] ferminianum Dall). Recent on the west coast from the Gulf of California to Panama.

578 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Type by subsequent designation: Palmer, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 7, p. 102, 1937) : Scald staminea Conrad. Gosport sand of Alabama.
De Boury's "Etude sur les sous-genres de Scalidae" was apparently awaiting publication when Ball's report on the Albatross dredgings came out. Dall noted the similarity of Teaetiscala to Ferminoscala and excused the retention of Teaetiscala by the seeming difference in the outer lip. None of the species of his Textiscala show the diagnostic varicose lip, and, as a matter of fact, although Dall includes the character in his description, none of his specimens show it.
The spiral sculpture in Scalina is relatively more prominent than in Acrilla H. Adams, and the axial sculpture usually finer, sharper, and less crowded. The spaces between the spirals show under the microscope a crowded linear grooving. The axials are fine, sharp laminae not very closely spaced. The basal disk is a conspicuous feature.
It is unfortunate that so rare a form must serve as the genotype of Conrad's Scalina. We have no example in the collections of the U. S. National Museum, and Mrs. Palmer makes no mention of any other than the genotype in Ithaca or in Philadelphia.
The group is represented in the Eocene faunas of Europe and Mexico, in the later Tertiary faunas of northern Italy, the southern United States, and the mid-Americas, and in the Eecent faunas of the east and west coasts of North America and the Gulf of Mexico.

fine crowded, punctate. Basal disk usually distinct. Aperture oval, widening anteriorly. Peristome continuous; labral varix prominent.
Nodiscala has been reported from the Eocene of Australia, but it is peculiarly characteristic of the Miocene of central Europe. There are, however, several species in the Pliocene of Italy, and the recent representatives, though few in species are widely distributed through the warmer waters.
Fragments of individuals of this well-characterized subgenus occur in the Shoal Eiver formation, but nothing sufficiently well preserved to name.
Scalina (Nodiscala) sp.
The fragments of Nodiscala that occur in the Shoal Eiver indicate a small but heavy species of slender outline, obtusely carinated medially and at the base of the body. The axials are low and rather ill-defined, approximately 12, obscurely nodulated at the peripheral and basal keels, absent altogether on the base. The spirals are fine, irregular, and crowded and are separated by microscopically punctate, linear interspirals. The aperture is oblique, oval, broadening anteriorly. The labral varix is prominent and persists around the anterior extremity. The basal disk is defined only by the absence of the axial sculpture and the more regular spirals, but the meager material may include no fully adult individuals.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 3742r, Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.

Scalina species
Fragments occur in the Chipola formation too imperfect to name, but showing the characteristic surface of Scalina, the fine, sharp, numerous but not crowded axial laminae, the low, flattened, irregular spirals, broadest on the medial portion of the whorls and separated by shallow interspaces filled with microscopically fine, linear groovings. Epitonium leroyi (Guppy), described from Trinidad and reported from the Bowden beds of Jamaica, is also referable to this genus, although it differs from the Chipola species in details of the sculpture.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.
Subgenus NODISCALA de Boury
1890. Nodiscala De Boury, Revision des Scalidae Miocenes et Pliocenes de 1'Italie, Pisa, p. 12.
Type by original designation: Scalaria bicarinata Sowerby. Eecent in the Philippines.
Shell rather small, heavy, solid, imperforate. Whorls of conch inflated medially, in some species obtusely angulated .at the periphery. Sutures more or less deeply impressed, the anterior margin usually crenulated or denticulate; axials low, numerous, commonly unequal, more or less nodose on the periphery. Spirals

Family 7EPITONIIDAE Genus GEGANLA. Jeffreys
1833. Tuba Isaac Lea, Contributions to geology, p. 127. Not Tuba Renier, 1804, Vermes.
1884. Gegania Jeffreys, Zool. Soc. London Proc., sig. 25, p. 365. Type by monotypy: Gegania plnguis Jeffreys. Collected by the Porcupine expedition off Cape Mondego, North Lat. 39° 39' to 39° 55' in 740 to 1,095 fathoms.
Type of Tuba Lea by subsequent designation (Cossmann, Catalogue illustre des coquilles de 1'Eoceiie des environs de Paris, vol. 3, p. 316,1888) : Tuba alternata ~Lea,=Littorina antiquaia Conrad. Claiborne Eocene of the Gulf Province. Herrmannsen in 1849 designated '"Turbo sculptus" Pilkenhorn as the type. Doubtless he had in mind Turbo sulcatus Pilkenhorn, a Barton shell mentioned by Lea in his original description. The error, however, makes the designation worthless.
Shell conical, reticulated, not umbilicated; nucleus globular and intorted, not spiral, nor sinistral. Differs from Mathilda in having a short spire and an iutorted but not heterostrophe nucleus. Jeffreys, 1884.
The nucleus is bulbous and tipped at the apex like that of Architectonica. Even though the initial tendency of the nuclear whorls is sinistral, as Dall maintained when he placed the family in the Mathildiidae, the fact that only the dextral whorls are exposed may

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

579

be of importance taxonomically. The genera most closely related seem to fall in the families Architectonicidae and Epitoniidae, the two main groups which according to Morley-Davies make up the suborder Ptenoglossa, and Gegania is tentatively placed within the wide limits of the Epitoniidae.
The genus has been reported from, strata as early as the Jurassic and still persists in restricted numbers in the warmer seas.
Gegania acutissima (Ball)
Plate LVII, figure 18
1892. Tuba acutissima Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 319, pi. 18, fig. 4a.
Shell with eight or nine rapidly enlarging whorls; nucleus minute, decollate in all the specimens, but from the slenderness of the subsequent whorls evidently not immersed; the three whorls succeeding the decollation nearly smooth, gradually taking on faint spiral striation which in the later whorls becomes a rather uniform series of sharp threads to the number of five or six above the periphery, separated by wider interspaces; on the base the spirals are still more sparse, except around the umbilicus; transverse sculpture of closer, fine, elevated lines most prominent in the interspaces and covering the whole surface in harmony with the lines of growth; whorls rounded and full, except at the periphery, which is more or less distinctly angulated; base convex, with an obscure angle about its middle; umbilicus distinct, variable in size, funicular, shadowed in front by the inner lip; pillar arched, thin, sometimes with a slight callus near the anterior end; aperture gibbously lunate, effuse near the pillar, slightly angulated by the basal and peripheral angles; a thin wash of callus covers the body, the throat is smooth; the suture is very distinct and runs a little below the peripheral angle. Altitude of shell 7.5; maximum diameter 5 millimeters.
This species has somewhat the aspect of a Trichotropis on account of the effuse aperture and angulated periphery. As the nucleus is not immersed, it is interesting as combining the broad form of Tuba proper with the naked nuclear coil of the section Mathilda, thus illustrating the slight systematic value which the characters relied on to separate the groups really possess. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113472. Type locality: No. 2211, Alum Bluff, lower bed, Liberty County, Fla. Gegania acutissinui has not been recognized in any of the collections other than those accessible to the author of the species. The form is known only from the type locality. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2211a, 7183P.
Gegania sp. ind.
A single individual, apparently new, was found in the Shoal Eiver materials. The rounded whorls converge at an angle of approximately 30° and are sculptured with 7 or 8 sharply elevated, flattened spirals equal in size and spacing and intersected by microscopically fine but sharp axial threadlets, about 25 or

30 to the whorl. As the form is probably young and somewhat imperfect it can serve only to establish the presence of the genus in the Shoal Eiver formation.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 3742r.
Superfamily CEEITHIACEA Family UTIOPIDAE Genus LITIOPA Rang
1829. Litiopa Rang, Anuales des sciences naturelles, vol. 16, p. 306.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 155, 1847) : Litiopa ~bombix Kienev=Litiopa melanostoma Eang. Described from Newfoundland.
Shell very thin, not large, ovate-conic. Whorls closely appressed, very feebly convex. Surface smooth or feebly striate concentrically. Aperture lobate, angulated posteriorly. Outer lip very thin and sharp, arcuated. Inner lip excavated, simple or reflected. Umbilicus usually imperforate. Anterior extremity of aperture truncate and more or less emarginate.
Litiopa has been reported from the early Tertiaries, although its occurrence, at least in the European Eocene, has been questioned. The Eecent species arepelagic and are especially abundant in the Sargasso Sea, where they hang suspended from the sargasso weed by glutinous threads 2 or 3 feet in length.
Litiopa palaeosargassina Maury
Plate L1V, figure 16
1910. Litiopa palaeosarffassina Maury, Bull. Am. Pal., vol. 4, No. 21, p. 28, pi. 7, fig. 5.
. Shell small, thin and delicate, polished, whorls four exclusive of the eroded nucleus, rather convex. Sculpture consisting of very fine spiral striae visible only under a lens. Aperture oval: outer lip simple, thin. Length of shell 5; greatest width 2.5 millimeters.
Oak Grove, Santa Rosa County, Fla. Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
Shell very thin and fragile, rather small, ovate-conic in outline. Whorls closely appressed, a little more than 6 in all including the minute, highly polished, inflated nucleus of a trifle more than one volution. Initial whorls of couch also inflated, gradually flattening into a feebly convex, buccinoid outline. Body whorl smoothly constricted at the base. Surface lustrous, lineated with microscopically fine spiral striae, 10 or 12 on the penultima, and even finer incrementals. Suture lines feebly impressed. Aperture lobate, sharply angulated and sulcated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip thin, very sharp, expanding anteriorly. Inner lip reflected, smoothly glazing the parietal wall and roofing but not concealing the umbilical chink. Anterior extremity of aperture squarely truncate and obscurely emarginate. Umbilical chink a very narrow, rather deep .depression that runs parallel to the labium from

580 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

the base of the body to the anterior extremity. Umbilical keel obtuse, outlined by 5 or 6 faint lirae.
Dimensions of topotype: Height, 3.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2 millimeters.
Topotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350402. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. In general outline and ornamentation, Litiopa palaeoswgassina suggests L. bombix, the type of the genus, but is readily isolated by the reflected labium. It has been recognized only in the immediate environs of the type locality. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646r, 5632r, 10659r, Cornell University collection.
Genus ALABA H. and A. Adams
1853. Alaba H. and A. Adams, Genera Recent Mollusca, vol. 1, p. 241 (as subgenus of Cerithiopsls, family Cerithiopsidae).
1862. Alaba A. Adams, Annals and Mag. Nat. History, vol. 10, p. 294.
Type by subsequent designation (Nevill, Hand list of Mollusca, Indian Museum, Calcutta, pt. 2, p. 181, 1885) ; Aloha, melanura (C. B. Adams )=Rissoa? melanura C. B. Adams. Recent off Jamaica.
The Alaba melanura from Jamaica in the museum collections is a more slender shell than Alaba tervaricosa described from the same area, but it is otherwise similar. Only the two species were mentioned by Henry and Arthur Adams in their original description of the genus, and A. tervaricosa was erroneously cited as A. trivaricosa. In 1862, however, Arthur Adams described a number of additional species of Alaba and noted the close resemblance of the group to Litiopdj rather than to Cerithiopsis.
The genus was restricted by Smith27 to those forms characterized by "whorls tumidly varicose; columella more or less truncated; labrum thickened in the adult state." The subgenus Diala was established to include those with "whorls not varicose (sometimes noduled around the middle) ; columella straightish, not truncated ; labrum not thickened."
The character of the outer lip is dependent on the growth stage. It is varicose during the resting periods, but in the intermediate seasons it is thin.
The Recent forms are denizens of the strands bordering the warmer seas.
Alaba has a meager representation in the Alum Bluff group. Only two species have been recognized one of them fairly common in the Chipola formation but not known outside of it; the other restricted in its distribution to the type locality in the Oak Grove sand. Diameter more than one-third the altitude; base of body whorl
not spirally striated ... ........ Alaba chipolana Dall. Diameter less than one-third the altitude; base of body whorl
spirally striated . . . . . . . Alaba doaona Gardner, n. sp.
27 Smith, B. A., Remarks on the genus Alaba, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pp. 537-540, 1875.

Alaba chipolana Dall
Plate LIV, figure 17
1892. Alaba chipolana, Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 292, pi. 21, fig. 9.
Shell small, smooth, with two very minute nuclear and eight or nine subsequent well-rounded whorls; sculpture only of faint incremental lines, obscure malleations and faint varices; the varices are irregular in number, sometimes as many as three on one whorl, but they are little elevated; the penultimate -varix is usually more pronounced in the adult than any of the others; aperture subovate, outer lip slightly thickened inside, simple; basal part rounded, with a faint sinus at the end of the pillar; body without perceptible callus; pillar straight, slender, perceptibly axially twisted. Lon. of shell 6.0; max. diam. 2.75 millimeters.
This species is smoother than most of the genus but has the characteristic features of Alaba. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113384. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. The young are obtusely angulated at the periphery; the adults elevated, acutely tapering, smoothly rounded on the body, and more or less drawn out basally. The early volutions are more convex and relatively lower than the later and obscurely tabulated posteriorly. The suture lines are distinctly impressed. A somewhat smoother and more slender form is associated with the typical A. chipolana an individual 4.0 millimeters in height but with a maximum diameter of only 1.4 millimeters. Though probably distinct at least subspecifically the specimens available all show signs of immaturity and had best be excluded from the literature for the present. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213a, 2564r, 3419P, 2211C.
Alaba dodona Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIV, figures 14, 15
Shell small, very slender. Whorls approximately 10 in all, increasing very gradually in diameter. Protoconch probably three-whorled, not preserved in the holotype, differentiated only by the higher luster; the volutions broadly convex and moderately elevated. Whorls of conch becoming rather irregular toward the aperture and more and more constricted at the sutures. Axial varices well-defined though irregular in size and arrangement, usually about 3 to the whorl. Later volutions lineated with faint spiral sulci, 12 on the body, less faint on the posterior portion and on the base of the body. Suture lines impressed, more deeply so on the later volutions than on the earlier. Aperture at a low angle to the axis, broadly lenticular, angulated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip of holotype thin, sharp, and arcuate, but varicose directly behind the margin. Inner lip concave. Parietal wall thinly washed. Pillar feebly reinforced and slightly twisted. Anterior sinus broad but very shallow.

OTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

581

Dimensions of holotype: Height, 4.5 ± millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.4 millimeters. Dimensions of incomplete paratype: Height, 2.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.2 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat Mus. No. 350405. Paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136045.
Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow Eiver, Okaloosa County, Pla.
Alaba dodona is smaller than the Chipola species, more slender, more strongly varicose, and distinctly though faintly" striated spirally on the later whorls. The slender race at Chipola is less strongly varicose. The species is rare even at the type locality.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, locality 2646r.

Shell small, turbinate, with a rather pointed apex and about six whorls (nucleus lost), rapidly enlarging; transverse sculpture of -ten rounded ribs extending from the suture to the periphery, where they cease abruptly, the interspaces wider than the ribs; lines of growth well-marked; spiral sculpture of (on the last whorl seven above and seven below the periphery) steong equal rounded threads with wider regular interspaces in which run minute spiral striae; whorls full, subangulate at the periphery, the base slightly flattened; suture distinct; umbilicus pervious, bounded by a rather wide smooth fascicle; aperture subquadrate, sharply lirate inside; a thin callus on the body; pillar thin, short, with a broad, sharp, nearly horizontal tooth at the base. Alt. 9.0; max. diam. 8.0 millimeters.
A single specimen of this well-marked little species was ob> tained. It has the same pointed spire as the other Chipola species, but differs from them and from the other American species in the details of its sculpture. Dall, 1892.

Family MODTTLIDAE Genus MODULUS Gray
1842. Modulus Gray, Synopsis Contents British Museum, ed. 44. pp. 60, 90. Genus without species.
1847. Modulus Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 150. Pseudotrochus 'Heilprin, 1887. Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 1, p. 114; (type: Pseudotrochus turbinatus Heilprin, from the Tampa limestone at Ballast Point, Fla.).
Type by original designation and tautonomy: Trochus modulus Linnaeus. Recent in the West Indies.
Shell rather heavy, low, turbinate or trochiform. Nucleus smooth, naticoid, paucispiral. Conchal sculpture usually ornate. Spirals dominant, commonly beaded by the incrementals. Axials undulatory, commonly retractive and continuous. Base oblique or feebly convex. Aperture entire, subcircular, rounded or angulated posteriorly, expanding anteriorly. Outer lip sharp, lirate within. Columella excavated, terminating anteriorly in a strongly oblique or horizontal buttress which forms the posterior margin of the fasciolar notch. Fasciole short, deeply emarginate. Umbilicus narrowly perforate in the genotype.
Modulus is the sole member of the Modulidae family. The Modulus fauna has not been increased by a single individual since the publication of the Wagner papers and is restricted in its known distribution to the Chipola formation. The Recent species are relatively few in number but world-wide in their distribution in the warmer seas.
Whorls of spire axially costate: Spirals approximately uniform in prominence over the entire surface .................. Modulus compactus Dall. Spirals much more prominent on the periphery and the base than on the sides of the spire ................... Modulus Moonicus Gardner, n. sp.
Whorls of spire not axially costate. . . .Modulus willcoxli Dall.
Modulus compactus Dall
Plate LV, figure 27
1892. Modulus compactus Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 294, pi. 22, fig. 10.

The figure does not clearly indicate that the buttress at the anterior extremity of the columella is also the posterior part of the margin of the fasciolar notch.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113387. Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed at Alum Bluff, Chattahoochee River, Pla. The species is allied to Modulus biconicus but is readily separable by the uniformity of the spiral threading and the absence of a prominent peripheral fillet. The sculpture of Modulus compactus is similar in general pattern to that of the genotype, but the Chipola shell is smaller and the spire higher. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211r.
Modulus biconicus Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 26
Shell rather small, rudely biconic, the spire much more acute, however, and more attenuated than the base. Whorls approximately 7. Apex more or less decorticated in all available material so that the nuclear characters are lost and the exact number of whorls indeterminate. Early volutions of conch trapezoidal, regularly increasing in size, sculptured with 5 or 6 low, rather broad lirations, equal in size and spacing except for the stronger peripheral spiral. Axials initiated on the later whorls of the spire, rapidly increasing in prominence, numbering approximately 10 to the whorl; body sculpture dominantly axial, the 10 costae uniform in size and spacing, evanescent toward the posterior suture, very broad and undulatory, separated by concave intercostals of nearly the same width as the costals. Spirals irregular on the body; 4 primaries between the suture and the periphery of the type more closely spaced posteriorly, with 1 or 2 secondaries intercalated in each of the interspiral areas except the anterior, which is threaded with about half a dozen exceedingly fine lirae; margin raised directly in front of the suture, thus simulating a heavy spiral. Periphery obtusely angulated, outlined by a broad and elevated fillet which is feebly undulated by the axials and minutely corrugated by the incrementals. Base

582 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

low, rounded, conic, adorned with 6 sharply elevated, evenly spaced cords, the posterior of which is the strongest and is more distantly spaced from the peripheral spiral than it is from the basal cord in front of it. Early whorls closely appressed, later more loosely wound. Suture indistinct in the apical region, deeply channeled and overhung by the periphery of the preceding whorl toward the aperture. Aperture subcircular, obtusely angulated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip sharp, strongly arcuate, obscurely angulated at the periphery, somewhat patulous, crenulated at the margin and internally lirate in harmony with the external sculpture. Parietal wall heavily glazed. Columella excavated, terminating anteriorly in a heavy horizontal buttress which forms the posterior margin of the fasciolar notch. Fasciole obscurely defined, lirated with two rather feeble spirals, emarginate at the apertural face. Umbilicus a mere chink.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 9.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 7.8 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mns. No. 114117. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Modulus Mconicus suggests Modulus compactus Ball in general Contour and character of sculpture, but it is more elevated than the latter, the spirals are much less uniform in size and spacing, the axials tend to evanesce towa'rd the posterior suture, and the periphery is outlined by a broad and prominent fillet. The species is known only from the environs of the type locality. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213r, 2564r, 3419r.
Modulus willcoxii Dall
Plate LV, figure 19
1892. Modulus willcoxii Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 294, pi. 18. fig. la.
Shell large, strong, with two (or more) small, smooth nuclear and seven subsequent sculptured whorls; whorls with a blunt duplex carina, on which the suture is wound; spiral sculpture, above the carina, of five or six strong, rather sharp, elevated ribs, subequal, with about equal interspaces; below the carina, on the base, are about seven more, growing stronger and flatter toward the pillar; these spirals are undulated by the intersection of numerous transverse sulci in harmony with the lines of growth; base flattish, subconic; aperture subquadrate; outer lip sharp-edged, sharply lirate inside in harmony with .the spiral sculpture; body with a thin callus; pillar short, bearing a broad and strong revolving lamella ; umbilicus closed ; suture distinct, slightly turriculate. Altitude of shell 20; maximum diameter 14 [17.8] millimeters.
Mr. Burns obtained but a single specimen of this fine species, which it gives me much pleasure to dedicate to Mr. Joseph Willcox, to whose energy and interest this investigation of our Southern Tertiary is largely due. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mns. No. 113386. Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Fla.

Modulus willcoxii Dall is the largest and finest of the three Chipola species. It stands apart from the other two Chipola shells and from the Recent West Indian species by reason of its larger size and stronger sculpture and also because of the slight shouldering of the whorl in front of the suture. Modulus angulatus C. B. Adams shares with it the absence of axial sculpture, but the spire of M. angulatus is a broad cone with no trace of tabulation in front of the suture line.
Modulus tamanensis Maury from the Machapoorie Quarry, Trinidad, is, however, strikingly similar. The Trinidad species exceeds the Chipola form in size and strength of sculpture. The shell figured by Mansfield28 is 29.0 millimeters high, overtopping that of the holotype of M. willcoxii by 9.0 millimeters. The spirals are" prominently elevated cords, and the interspirals are deeply channeled. The peripheral spiral is simple instead of duplex as in M. willcoxii and is not trenched by the incremental. The similarity between the two species is sufficiently striking, however, to be considered in correlation of the Trinidad beds.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities ?7893r, 2212r.
Family CAECIDAE
Genus CAECUM Fleming
1813. Caecum Fleming, Brewster's Edinburgh Encyclopedia, vol. 7 (1), p. 67 (fide Sherborn).
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 203, 1847) : Dentalium trachea Montagu. Recent from the British Isles to the Mediterranean.
Shell a small, gently arcuate tube. Protoconch caducous, planorboid, coiled >two or three times. Nuclear and adolescent shells successively outgrown and discarded; a septum or "plug" serving to close the posterior extremity of the shell. Form and position of "plug" constant and characteristic of the species. Outer surface of the arcuate adult tube dorsal, the inner surface ventral. Adult shell smooth, axially sulcate, annulate or reticulate. Aperture circular, entire.
The genus is rather abundant in the Tertiaries and more than a hundred species have been listed from the warm waters of the Recent seas.
Caecum is inadequately represented in the Alum Bluff. Most of the few individuals that have been collected are young, and there is nothing very significant about their apparent affinities. Surface smooth.
Apertural ring developed .................. ............ Caecum chipolanum Gardner, n. sp.
Apertural ring not developed .......................... Caecum sp. cf. C. carolinianum Dall.
28 Mansfield, W. C., Miocene gastropods and scaphopods from Trinidad, British West Indies : U. S. Nat. Mus. Proc., vol. 66, art. 22, p. 49, pi. 7, figs. 1, 2, 1925.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

583

Surface annulated throughout its extent...................... Caecum pararegulare Gardner, n. sp.
Surface auuulated near the aperture; faintly longitudinally striate ......................... Caecum carolinianum Dall.
Caecum chipolanum Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 13
Shell small but rather solid and not very slender, approximately uniform in diameter throughout its extent, gently and nearly symmetrically arched. Surface rather highly polished, smooth except for a heavy aperttiral ring. Aperture obliquely truncated, feebly contracted in front of the ring. Plug low, mucronate, bearing a small, rather slender spur near the dorsal margin.
Dimensions of holotype: Height 2.6 millimeters; maximum diameter 0.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329000. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Caecum chipolanum is readily isolated from coexistent members of the genus by the entire absence of sculpture. It is larger and less slender than C. glfibrum Montagu of the Recent fauna and smaller, more uniform in diameter and more gently arcuate than G. virginianum Meyer of the later Tertiaries. It further differs from both of these species in the development of an apertural ring. Caecum putnamense Mansfield, 1924, from the later Pliocene or early Pleistocene of Putnam County, Fla., is comparable in its small dimensions and arcuate outline but the anterior ring of C. putnamense is not so heavy as it is in 0. chipolanum and the plug is not mucronate but mammillate. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213 r, 3419r, 7151P, 2211a, 7183C. .
Caecum pararegulare Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 12
Shell a minute, gently arcuated tube, slightly larger at the anterior extremity. Surface finely and sharply annulated, the rings 40 to 50, a little less crowded dorsally and toward the aperture. Aperture not constricted, obliquely truncated, outlined by a rather wide and somewhat thickened simple margin. Plug ungulate, a low dorsally truncated, asymmetric cone set well behind the median vertical.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 2.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 0.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351485. Type locality: No. 3733, three-fourths of a mile west of Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. Caecum pararegulare suggests a very closely crenulated C. regulare Carpenter. The two species present approximately the same dimensions and contour, but the number of rings in the earlier form is almost double

that in the later form. Caecum floridanum compactum Dall is much larger and the annulations upon it broader and less sharply elevated than those of C. pararegulare.
Caecum properegulare Mansfield, from the Brasso beds, is doubtless closely related. The two shells are of similar dimensions, but the Trinidad species is much less closely annulated than the species from Shoal River.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 7893r, 2213r ; Shoal River formation, localities 5079r, 1066F, 3733 r .
Caecum species cf. C. carolinianum Dall
Three individuals two from the Chipola formation and one from the Oak Grove sand, all of them obviously juvenile resemble more closely the young of Caecum carolinianum Dall (Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 300, pi. 22, fig. 25, 1892) from the Caloosahatchee marl of Florida than of any other described species. The young and the adult are so dissimilar however, not only in this species but in many other members of the genus, that in the absence of adult material determinations can be only suggested.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r ; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646r.
Occurrence of Caecum carolinianum: Miocene Duplin marl, Natural Well, 2 miles southwest of Magnolia, Duplin County, N. C. Pliocene Waccamaw formation, Tilly's Lake, Horry County, S. C.; Caloosahatchee marl; Caloosahatchee River, Fla. .Recent Atlantic Ocean from Cape Hatteras to Egmont Key in 2 to 63 fathoms.
Family VEKMBTIDAE
The family includes aberrant, vermiform mollusks that exhibit external irregularity in growth and sculpture. In outward appearance these mollusks are very near to some of the annelid worms. The Vermetidae are characterized, however, by a spiral nuclear shell, internal septae, and a tube composed of three calcareous layers instead of only two as in the genus Serpula of the annelids. The septae are considered by Carpenter and Mb'rch to be analogous to the internal cup of the Crucibulum and to the diaphragm of the Crepidula. Morch's "Review29 is still the most exhaustive published study of the family, but he overvalued individual and specific variations. In the fossil forms, however, specific and even generic separations are difficult, for the best diagnostics, the nucleus and the operculum, are usually wanting, and even the septae are commonly concealed or absorbed.
The family is fairly well represented in the Oak Grove sand, but in the other formations it constitutes an inconspicuous member of the fauna.
29 Morch, Otto, A. L., Review of the "Vermetidae," Zool. Soc. London Proc., pp. 145-181, 326-365, 1801; pp. 54-83, 1862.

584 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Genus LEMENTINA Risso
1826. Lemintina Risso, Histoire naturelle des principales productions de 1'Europe meridionale, vol. 4, p. 114.
1845. Anffninella Conrad, Fossils of the Medial Tertiary or Miocene formation of the United States, p. 77. No generic description but monotype Anffuinella virginiana GonraA=Serpula mrginica Conrad, described and figured. Chesapeake Miocene of Virginia and North Carolina.
Type by monotypy: Lemintina cwineri Risso=$erpula arenaria Linnaeus. Recent in the Mediterranean.
The shell is tubular and irregularly coiled or twisted and attached or free. The external surface is usually lirate and often more or less granulose. No longitudinal laminae are developed, but the tube is commonly chambered by perpendicular partitions or pouches concave forward. The operculum is absent.
The genus is widely distributed in the warmer waters of the Recent seas. ^ The determinable Alum Bluff species are restricted to the Oak Grove sand, but fragments of individuals occur in the Chipola formation which may be properly referable to this genus.
Lemintina granifera (Say)
Plate LV, figure 11
1824. Serpula granifera Say, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour., 1st ser., vol. 4, p. 154, pi. 8, fig. 4.
1892. Serpulorbis granifera Say. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 303.
1894. Anguinella virginiana Conrad." Whitfield, U. S. Geol. Survey Mon. 24, p. 132, pi. 24, figs. 1-5.
Not Angwnella virginiana Conrad, Fossils of the Medial Tertiary or Miocene formation of the United States, p. 44, fig. 4, 1845.
1896. Serpula granifera Say. Reprint of Say, 1824, Harris, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 1, no. 5, p. 60, pi. 8, fig. 4.
1904. Vermetus graniferus (Say). Martin, Maryland Geol. Survey, Miocene, p. 232, pi. 55, figs. 14, 15.
1909. Yermetus graniferus (Say). Grabau and Shimer, North American index fossils, vol. 1, p. 737, fig. 1072a-b (after Martin).
1915. Serpulorlris granifera Say. Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 95.
1930. Serpulorbis granifera (Say). Dall, Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 102, pi. 14, fig. 4.
1937. SerpulorUs granifera (Say)?. Mansfield, Florida Dept. Conserv. Geol. Bull. 15, p. 160.
Covered with longitudinal, contiguous, slightly elevated, granulated striae.
Shell subcylindric, contorted, inferior side fiat; the whole surface is composed of very numerous, small, contiguous striae, each consisting of a single row of granules; these series are alternately smaller.
Diameter of the larger end three-tenths, of the largest specimen two-fifths of an inch.
The continuity of the tube within is interrupted by oblique diaphragms. It sometimes approaches the spiral form, and one specimen has three complete volutions of much regularity. Say, 1824.
Lemintina granifera was described from one of the shells in the Finch collection, made presumably in

Maryland. All that is known of these shells is Say's statement concerning them, namely, "The following descriptions were made out from specimens in a very large and fine collection of fossil shells which Mr. John Finch obtained with much labor and some expense in Maryland, and which that gentleman with great liberality submitted to my examination." Mansfield believed from internal evidence that they came not from Maryland but from Virginia. Among them is Pecten clintonius Say, which has not since been recorded from Maryland and which is otherwise restricted to zone 1 of the Yorktown formation in Virginia and North Carolina. Mansfield also expressed some doubt that the tubes from the Choctawhatchee formation of Florida which are referred to L. granifera are specifically identical with those from the Chesapeake.
The species is characterized by loose but intricate coiling, granular axial lirations and numerous little pouches, concave anteriorly, set into the tube at rightangles to the axis. In abundance and wide distribution in the North Carolina and Virginia Miocene, it is outstripped only by the Petalooonchus sculptwratus H. C. Lea, a larger, more angular, more closely and regularly coiled form, with fewer and more coarsely granular, axial lirations. The character which separates the two species generically the development of internal, axial laminae in the latter is so commonly absent that it is necessary to supplement it with criteria of no generic significance.
The Miocene forms from Florida seem a little more finely sculptured and a little less granular than those from the higher Miocene of the Atlantic seaboard, but the constant differences are not sufficient to afford a basis for specific separation.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities ?2646a, ?5632r, ?5630P, ?7054P.
Outside occurrence: Tampa limestone, Ballast Point, Hillsboro County, Fla., (Dall and Mansfield?) ; White Beach near Osprey, Manatee County, Fla. (Dall). Calvert formation, Jericho, N. J.; Plum Point, Chesapeake Bay; and 3 miles west of Centerville, Queen Annes County, Md. Choptank formation, Jones Wharf, Governor Run (lower bed), and Greensboro, Caroline County, Md. St. Marys formation, St. Marys River, Md.; Urbanna Cliffs on the Rappahannock River, Middlesex County, Va., and Union Mills, 2y2 miles south of Farnham, Richmond County, Va. Yorktown formation, many localities along the rivers in York, Isle of Wight, Southampton, and Nansemond Counties, Va.; many localities along the Tar and Chowan Rivers in Edgecombe, Hartford, and Bertie Counties, N. C. Duplin marl, Natural Well, Duplin County, N. C. Waccamaw formation, Wilmington, New Hanover County, N. C. Choctawatchee formation, Ecphora zone and possibly Cancellaria zone in teon County, Fla.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

585

Lemintina papulosa (Guppy)
Plate LV, figure 20
1866. Vermettis papulosus Guppy. Geol. Soc. London, Quart. Jour., vol. 22, p. 292. pi. 17, fig. 3.
1917. Serpulorbis papulosa Guppy. Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 5, no. 29, p. 127, pi. 22, fig. 10.
1922. Serpulorbis papulosus (Guppy). Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, Proc. for 1921, pt. 2, p. 376.
1922. Serpulorbis papulosa (Guppy). Olsson, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 9, no. 39, p. 145, pi. 12, fig. 1.
1925. Serpulorbis papulosa Guppy. Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 10, no. 42, p. 225.
1928. Lemintina papulosa (Guppy). Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 346, pi. 26, fig. 6.
Shell nearly straight, rather irregularly spirally contorted, ornamented with regular longitudinal rows of tubercles interlined with crenate striae; aperture subcircular. Guppy, 1866.
Holotype (British Museum, Natural History, Geological Department No. 64081. Woodring, 1928.
A tube about 33.0 millimeters long and 9 millimeters in diameter is the only record of the existence of this typically mid-American species on the mainland north of Costa Rica. It is a slightly contorted short length of an adult shell, decorated with incrementals and with 11 rows of fairly evenly spaced pustules.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498201, from locality 14436, which is the gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle and 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, 14436r.
Lemintina papulosa, is recorded from the middle Miocene (Gatun formation) of Costa Kica, the middle and upper Miocene (Manzanilla beds and Springvale beds) of Trinidad, the upper Miocene (Bowden beds) of Jamaica, and the middle Miocene (Cercado and Gurabo beds) of the Dominican Republic.
Genus PETALOCONCHUS H. C. Lea
1846. Petaloconchus H. C. Lea, Am. Philos. Soc. Trans., n. ser., vol. 9, p. 233.
Type (by monotypy) : Petaloconchus sculpturatus H. C. Lea. Upper Miocene of the Atlantic seaboard from Virginia to Florida.
Shell tubular, solid, irregularly twisted, with two internal longitudinal plates.
The singular shell, on which I propose to found the above genus, differs from all the known tubular shells that I have met with, in the two internal longitudinal plates * * *. H. C. Lea, 1846.
The genus has a meager representation in the Tertiary and Recent faunas. The Miocene representatives are numerous in the Oak Grove sand and not rare in the Chipola formation, and a few fragments of doubtful affinities from the Shoal River formation have also been referred to this genus.

Petaloconchus sculpturatus H. C. Lea
Plate LV, figures 10, 21
1846. Petaloconchus sculpturatus H. C. Lea, Am. Philos. Soc. Trans., 2d ser., vol. 9, p. 233, pi. 34, fig. 3.
1856. Petaloconchus sculpturatus Lea. Tuomey and Holmes, Pleiocene fossils of South Carolina, p. 123, pi. 26, fig. 13.
1858. Petaloconchus sculpturatus Lea. Eminons, Kept. North Carolina Geol. Survey, p. 271. fig. 169.
1892. Vermetus (Petaloconchus) sculpturatus H. C. Lea. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 305.
1930. Petaloconchus sculpturatus H. C. Lea. Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 104, pi. 14, fig. 10.
Shell sometimes twisted, sometimes turreted, thick, with small longitudinal noduliferous ribs; internal laminae smooth, polished, obsolete at the mouth; mouth round. Diam. .20 of an inch.
The longitudinal costae are generally nodulous, but they occasionally seem rather to be cancellated by transverse sulci, which, in other specimens, appear to usurp their place. The two internal laminae are placed at about one-sixth of the circumference apart. They are generally directed towards the centre, and sometimes nearly meet. In some specimens they are much smaller than in others. They rarely or never seem to be continued to the aperture.
This is a very variable shell, both as to the sculpture and internal plates. I at first thought that there were two or three distinct species, but the varieties glide imperceptibly into each other. It appears to be by no means an uncommon shell at Petersburg.
The form figured is a very usual one. I have but few specimens which do not exhibit a decided tendency to form regular revolutions, and in some, the axis is so straight that a pin may be thrust through the umbilicus from the apex to the base.
The second figure is a specimen fractured to exhibit the appearance of the laminae. H. C. Lea, 1846.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350411. Type locality: Petersburg, Va. Figure 10 illustrates a specimen from Oak Grove enlarged 15 times. The photograph is made from beneath, so that the surface of attachment was exposed to the camera. Figure 21 is No. 1575 in the collections of the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia, presumably the holotype of sculpturatus from Petersburg, Va. It does not, however, represent the individual illustrated by Lea, 1846, unless that specimen has been badly broken in the meantime. Petaloconchus domingensis Sowerby, 1850, widespread in the mid-Americas, is closely related. Olsson, 1922, and Mansfield, 1930, considered it identical with the Costa Rican species. Pilsbry, 1922, and Woodring, 1928, thought it deserved no more than subspecific rank. Miss Maury believed that she could detect a difference in the coiling plan, stating that "P. domingensis typically coils in a widening cylinder, with whorls much flattened on the sides and angulate at the base" and that "P. sculpturatus coils in a tapering cone, with whorls less flattened and more convex at the base." That distinction does not hold very well for the specimens in our collections. In the mid-American species

586 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

the sculpture seems rather more subdued than it does in the Atlantic seaboard form and so long as the two names are well established in the literature, P. domingensis may perhaps be retained as a subspecies of the more northern P. sculpturatus.
Petaloconchus alcimus Mansfield, 1925, included under P. sculpturatus by Guppy, 1910, and under P. sculpturatus var. domingensis by Maury, 1925, is the representative of the group in the upper Miocene of Trinidad.
Petaloconchus sculpturatus is the most abundant species in the Alum Bluff group, particularly at Oak Grove. The earlier Miocene representatives do not attain the dimensions reached by the later Miocene individuals, but they are similar in their habit of growth, in the general character of the external sculpture, and the disposition of the internal laminae. The species is remarkable for its close coiling; commonly half a dozen or so whorls, all of them 6 to 8 millimeters across, are piled one on top of the other, with the tubes flattened laterally and along the plane of contact and angulated at the sutures. One individual which is quite certainly referable to this genus still retains its protoconch of four smooth, rather inflated volutions, which increase regularly in size and with a moderate degree of rapidity. The external surface, particularly in slightly weathered individuals, may present an evenly reticulate aspect. The spiral lirae are usually 3 or 4 on the

exposed surface of the tightly coiled tubes, and the axials, which are commonly dominant, are somewhat rugose in character and similar in spacing to the spirals.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 10609p, 2212C ; Oak Grove sand, localities 2646% 5632?, 5631r, 5633P, 7054r, 9961»; Shoal River formation, locality ?3742r.
Outside occurrence: Yorktown formation, widely distributed in Virginia and North Carolina; Duplin marl, widely distributed in North and South Carolina; Choctawhatchee formation, Ecphora and Cancellaria zones in Florida.
Family ARCHITECTONICIDAE
Genus ARCHITECTONICA "Bolten" Eoeding
1798. ArcMtectonica "Bolten" Roeding, Museum Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 78.
=Solarium Lamarck, 1799, Prodrome d'une nouvelle classification des coquilles, Soc. histdre nat. Paris Mem., p. 74.
1909. ArcMtectonica Bolten. Call, U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 59, p. 80.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 151, 1847) : Trochus perspectivus Linnaeus. Recent in the Indo-Pacific.
The family of the Architectonicidae is placed by Morley Davies under the Ptenoglossa.

Periphery of body whorl acutely angulated; base flattened at least near the periphery .................... .ArcMtectonica s. s. Spirals 4 on the adult whorls. ............................................ .ArcMtectonica qwadriseriata (Sowerby) s. s. Spirals cut into sharply rounded granules; at least three beaded cords surrounding the denticulate margin of the umbilicus ........................................................................... ArcMtectonica cMpolana Ball. Spirals simple on the body whorl of the adult, cut in the early volutions into somewhat flattened squarish areas; usually only a single beaded cord surrounding the denticulate margin of the umbilicus: Sutures impressed but not channeled ............................ .ArcMtectonica qnadriseriata (Sowerby), subsp. Sutures channeled ............... ................ . .ArcMtectonica quadriseriata waltonensis Gardner, n. subsp.
Spirals 1 to 3 on the adult whorls: Outer basal spirals less prominent than the peripheral cord; a second spiral developed outside that which outlines the umbilical keel .................................................................... ArcMtectonica alvear Gardner. Outer basal spiral equal in size to the peripheral cord; a single spiral outlining the umbilical keel..................... ArcMtectonica verecunda Gardner.
Periphery of body whorl rounded or obtusely angulated; base smoothly convex ............................................. ArcMtectonica (Pseudotorinia) bisulcata D'Orbigny.

Subgenus ARCHITECTONICA s. s.
1798. ArcMtectonica "Bolten" Roeding, Museum Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 78.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 151, 1847) ; Trochus perspectives Linnaeus. Recent in the Indo-Pacific.
The outline is that of a low beehive. The nucleus dips vertically downward at the apex so that only the final small, well-rounded nuclear whorl is visible. The spiral bands on the earlier part of the shell are trenched by very strong and strongly retractive incrementals but on the later volutions become lower, less regular and almost obsolete. The periphery is subacute, the aper-

ture subquadrate, and the umbilicus wide and encircled by the dentate umbilical keel, which can be traced to the apex.
The West Indian A. noT)ilis is remarkably close to the genotype. It is a much smaller shell, and the umbilicus is rather wider and more conspicuously funicular. The general outline and sculpture plan are,
however, the same.
Three out of the five species or subspecies of Architectonica isolated in the Alum Bluff group are members of the A. nobilis group. The relationship of the Alum Bluff forms is significant in view of the tendency within the group toward a simplification of the sculpture.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

587

Each horizon is represented by a distinct and a restricted race. The Chipola form is the most ornate of the three, the Shoal River the most subdued.
Architectonica nobilis "Bolten" Roeding
1781. Trochus perspectives Linnaeus. Chemnitz, ConchylienCabirtet, vol. H, pp. 121-127 (part), pi. 172. figs. 1695, 1696.
1798. Architectonica nobilis "Bolten" Roeding, Museum Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 78.
1822. Solarium granulatum Lamarck, Animaux sans vert6bres, vol. 7, p. 3.
Neither Roeding nor Lamarck figured their species, but they both referred to figures of the polynomial Lister, 1785. Thus Roeding's Architectonica of 1798 supplants Lamarck's Solarium- of 1799, and Roeding's A. nobilis supplants Lamarck's S. granulatum; thus Solarium granulatum Lamarck becomes Architectonica nobilis Roeding. Woodring, in 1928, used Architectonica nobilis quadriseriata (Sowerby) for the West Indian shell and discussed at length the closely related variants in the mid-Americas. Dall in 1892 noted that the fossil individuals were more granulose than the Recent, but he included the forms found in the Duplin marl and Waccamaw formations with the Recent Solarium yranulatum, and Mansfield in 193'0 referred to it the specimens from the Ecphora and the Cancellaria zones of the Choctawhatch.ee formation of Florida.
The close relationship between the Recent West Indian A. nobilis and A. nobilis quadriseriata described from the middle Miocene of Santo Domingo is accepted. However, the nomenclature becomes so cumbersome when the attempt is made to recognize variants of A. nobilis quadriseriata that the Tertiary West Indian form has been treated as a species.
Architectonica quadriseriata (Sowerby) s. s.
1850. Solarium quadriseriatum Sowerby, Geol. Soc. London, Quart. Jour., vol. 6, p. 51, pi. 10, figs. 8a, 8b, 8c.
1928. Architectonica (Architectonica) nobilis quadriseriata (Sowerby) Woodring, Miocene rnollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 354, pi. 27, figs. 5-7.
The typical mid-American Miocene shell has not been recognized in the Alum Bluff group of Florida.
Architectonica chipolana (Dall)
Plate LVIII, figures 1, 2
1892. Solarium granulatum var. chipolanum Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 329. .
Those from Chipola are all small specimens, but agree perfectly with the younger granulatum, except in having the periphery and basal ribs conspicuously beaded. They may form a variety chipolanum. Dall. 1892.

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329031.
Type locality: No. 2564, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.
.Architectonica quadriseriata (Sowerby) was considered by Dall 30 as a synonym of Solarium granulatum Laniarck=A. nobilis Roeding, although he noted that "the Jamaica Miocene variety quadriseriatum Sby. is slightly more flattened above the periphery than the type." In addition to the uniformly lower height the granules are sharper and less elongated than in the Recent form and are more persistent. The Miocene race in the West Indies is intermedial between the Chipola form and the later Tertiary and Recent forms, although much nearer to the former than to the latter. The outlines of the two Miocene races are similar, but in .the earlier or Chipola type the sculpture is a little sharper and the beading, particularly on the periphery and the base, noticeably more prominent and persistent. The tendency toward a simpler sculpture is perceptible even in the comparison of a series of Pliocene and Recent species. The subspecies is described from immature individuals.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213C, 2564P, 3419P, 7151r, 2211P.
Architectonica quadriseriata (Sowerby), subsp.
Architectonica quadriseriata (Sowerby) is represented in the Oak Grove fauna of both Florida and Georgia by still another unnamed subspecific race. It is characterized by a more subdued sculpture than that which ornaments A. quadriseriata s. s. Both on the apical and basal surfaces the spirals are similar in number and arrangement to those of the species s. s., but in the Oak Grove subspecies the incremental sculpture is relatively feeble, and instead of dissecting the spirals into a series of sharply rounded beads it cuts them into squarish or oblong areas that seem from the somewhat oblique undercutting to overlap one another like tiles on a roof. The incrementals are also less persistent in the Oak Grove subspecies and evanesce anteriorly as early as the fifth whorl, leaving the anterior and peripheral spirals simple. The basal sculpture is similar in both the species s. s. and the subspecies, though the spirals are less deeply dissected in the subspecies.
A. quadriseriata (Sowerby) subsp. is intermediate in sharpness of sculpture between species from the Bowden beds of Jamaica and the subspecies from the Shoal River formation, which is characterized by a relatively subdued and flattened ornamentation.
The form is rare even at the single horizon at which it is represented.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 3385r, 7148r, 2646r, 5632r, 7054r.

Dimensions of holotype: Height, 7.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.5 millimeters.
695462 47 7

"Dall, W. H., Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 328, 1892.

588 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Architectonica quadriseriata waltonensis Gardner
Plate LVIII, figures 8, 10
1936. Architectonica quadriseriata ivaltonensis Gardner, Florida Dept. Cons., Geol. Bull. 14, p. 47, pi. 9, fig. 1, pi. 10, fig. 4.
Shell of normal size for the group and of normal proportions. Whorls very broadly and feebly inflated, 7 or 8 in number, including the small, loosely coiled protoconch of iy2 volutions. External sculpture dominantly spiral, similar in general character and in the number and arrangement of the spirals to A. quadriseriata s. s., but more subdued and less persistent; incrementals more shallow and more widely spaced than in the Jamaican or even the Oak Grove race, obliquely undercutting the low fillets so that they appear to be made up of a series of minute, overlapping tiles; sulci beginning to evanesce as early as the sixth whorl, where they appear for the most part as incised, linear grooves cutting obliquely across the spirals, replaced on the body whorl by microscopically fine striae; basal sculpture much reduced. Umbilical pit outlined by a wide and heavily corrugated spiral, which is separated by a .profund sulcus from the somewhat rugose band outside it. Periphery outlined by a heavy cord, and just within it but separated from it by a very fine threadlet, another cord of almost equal size and also simple. Area between the umbilical and peripheral spirals about half the width of the entire base, feebly convex and smooth in the adult except for 2 or 3 faint spiral striations and incremental scratches that radiate from the umbilical keel. Sutures so deeply channeled that the profile of the spire is interrupted and the whorls assume a gibbosity greater than that which they really possess. Characters of aperture normal for the species. Umbilical funnel a trifle narrower and less open than that of A. quadris&t^iata s. s.
Dimensions of holotype (a slightly imperfect specimen) : Height, 14 millimeters; maximum diameter, 26 millimeters.
Type material: Holotype, U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351515. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Eiver, Walton County, Fla. This subspecies differs from the form from the Bowden beds of Jamaica only in the somewhat less flattened whorls, the less ornate and less persistent sculpture, the channeled suture, the slightly smaller umbilicus, and the development of only one instead of two spiral bands encircling the heavily corrugated umbilical spiral. Architectonics bellastriata var. vicksburgensis (Ball) is probably more closely allied with the A. nobilis group than it is with A. bellastriata. It differs from the Shoal River race in the somewhat more elevated and more rounded outline, the rather finer sculpture on the sides of the spire, the more ornate base, and, most obviously, in the exposure of the peripheral spiral as a fine piping directly behind the suture

line. The species is the most common representative of the genus within the Shoal River beds.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation localities 3856a, 3742a , 2238r, 5618r.
Architectonica alvear Gardner
Plate LVIII, figures 6, 7, 9
1936. Archilectonica alvear Gardner, Florida Dept. Cons., Geol. Bull. 14, p. 48, pi. 9, fig. 2, pi. 10, figs. 5-6.
Shell of moderate size for the genus, somewhat rounded, suggesting in outline a very low beehive. Whorls about 7% in number, including the small, loosely coiled protoconch of approximately l 1/^ volutions, the initial half turn, however, largely immersed. Whorls of conch flattened between the channeled sutures, the body whorl somewhat tumid, sharply angulated at the periphery, and flattened on the base. Sculpture simple for the genus; earliest spiral initiated, as in others of the A. nobilis group, directly behind the suture on the first turn of the conch, growing increasingly prominent and more sharply granulose until it reaches the ultima, where it tends to flatten out and become more simple; a second spiral introduced soon after the first directly in front of the suture, but this is quickly reduced to a series of fine incremental puckerings; wide, flattened interspiral area smooth except for oblique incremental rugae, which are most pronounced on the spire and correspond in number to the posterior puckers and the granules of the anterior spiral. Periphery outlined by a very heavy, rounded, feebly corrugated cord, which appears to be wider on the basal surface than on the apical, and a second strongly rounded and well-elevated cord developed on the base just within the peripheral spiral and separated from it by only a deep linear sulcus. Umbilical carina sharp, outlined by a wide denticulate spiral; outer margin separated from the flattened, more or less rugose spiral that surrounds it by a narrow but deep channel; area between the umbilical and peripheral spirals flattened, smooth except for radial-growth striae and a vague spiral sulcus a little less than halfway from the periphery to the umbilicus. Umbilical pit rather large, open to the apex, the wall displaying the umbilical keel of the successive whorls. Shell broken at the mouth, and characters of aperture not well known.
Dimensions of imperfect holotype: Height, 17 millimeters; maximum diameter, 25 millimeters.
Type material: Holotype, U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350446. Type locality: No. 5633, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. Architectonica alvear is allied to A, amphiterma Dall from the Miocene of Maryland. It is relatively higher, however, with a more prominent and, on the spire, more sharply annulate anterior spiral. The young are discoidal in outline.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

589

Architectonica qiiad/riseriata, waltonensis is lower than A. alvear and the whorls are more flattened and more deeply channeled at the sutures. Intermediate spiral fillets are present in waltonensis, which on the later whorls are as strong as the anterior and posterior spirals.
The species is restricted in its distribution to the Oak Grove sand.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646C, 5632r, 5633r, 7054r.
Section PSILAXIS Woodring
1928. Psilaxis Woodring, Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 355.
Type by original designation: Architectonica (Philippia) krebsii Morch. Eecent in the West Indies and off the Florida Coast.
Shape of shell and umbilicus, and apertural features as in Architectonica s. s.. though the aperture is more ovate. Dorsal part of nucleus consisting of one large whorl. Axial sculpture of dorsal surface confined to sutural wrinkles on first postnuclear whorl. Spiral sculpture of dorsal surface consisting of cords adjoining periphery. Ventral sculpture consisting of a crenulated umbilical cord, separated from a narrower crenulated thread by a groove, which in turn is separated by a groove from the smooth main part of base. A narrow spiral thread adjoins the periphery.
The recognition of this group of Architectonicas seems justified because of the very large nuclear whorl, as seen in dorsal view, and because of the distinctive sculpture. It is represented by living species in the western Atlantic and western Pacific. The species here described are the first American fossils recorded. Woodring, 1928.

strong cord; a second cord equally strong revolving on the base directly in front of it and separated from it by only a linear interspace. Area between the umbilicus and periphery broadly rounded, devoid of spiral sculpture except for a feeble thread, delimited by incised lines revolving about one-third the distance from the peiiphery to the umbilical keel and marking the outer limit of the radial sulci of the umbilical, area; keel sharply crenulated, set off by a deeply impressed channel. Incremental sculpture manifested in the puckerings of the base, the crenate bands on the spire, and the very faint striae on the smooth medial portion of the whorl. Aperture rudely quadrate, sharply angulated at the peripheral and umbilical keels and- at the union of the parietal wall with the labrum and the pillar. Outer lip thin and sharp. Body wall thinly glazed. Umbilicus small, its diameter less than onethird that of the entire base, persistent to the apex, revealing within the umbilical keels of the earlier volutions.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 4 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 352117. Type locality: No. 5618, 3^ miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, Walton County, Fla. Architectonica vereeunda is interesting as the first record in the Floridian Miocene of the section Psilaxis Woodring. The Shoal Eiver shell differs from the two described Bowden species in slight details of the spiral sculpture and in the stronger incremental striae, which have sufficient depth and regularity to bead the spirals on the dorsal surface. Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 5618r.

Architectonica vereeunda Gardner
Plate LVIII, figures 3, 4, 5
1936. Architectonwa (Psilaxis) verecwn&a Gardner, Florida Dept. Cons., Geol. Bull. 14, p. 50, pi. 10, figs. 1-3.
Shell small, a much depressed cone, acutely angulated at the periphery, flattened on the basal surface, and broadly rounded in the apical region. Nucleus porcellaneous, large, ill-shaped, broadly inflated, completing a little more than a single revolution, strongly differentiated from the conch both by the abrupt change in the texture of the shell and by the initiation of the conchal sculpture. Whorls of conch 3' in the unique type, which is probably not fully mature; earliest whorl obscurely rounded, the two later volutions flattened laterally. Sculpture very simple; two narrow ornate bands of equal width marked off by incised lines, the 'one placed directly in front of the suture and the other directly behind it; a second anterior, noncrenate, and slightly narrower band delimited by a more feebly incised line, set about one-third the distance from the anterior to the posterior suture. Suture line deeply impressed but very narrow. Periphery of body wound with a very

Siibgenus FSETTDOTOBINIA. Sacco
1892. Pseudotorinia Sacco, Molluschi dei terreni terziarii del Piemonte e della Liguria, pt. 12, p. 66.
Type by original designation: Solarium obtusum Bronn. Miocene and Pliocene of northern Italy.
Torinia Gray 31 (type, Trochus variegatus Gmelin from the Indo-Pacific) includes a group of Architectonica characterized by a small, top-shaped operculum. Sherborn 32 considered Torinia, 1840, a nude name. He made no reference to the 44th edition, 1842, which Iredale 33 cited. Neither edition is available for consultation. Iredale quotes Gray's characterization as follows: "Torima differs [from Solarium] in having a nearly orbicular operculum, which is very convex and marked with a spiral ridge looking like a pagoda."
Sacco indicated the difficulty of recognizing in the
31 Gray, J. E., Synopsis of the contents of the British Museum, ed. 42, p. 147, 1840 (vide Sherborn).
Gray, J. E., Idem, ed. 44, p. 60, 1842 (vide Iredale). 32 Sherborn, C. D., Index Animalium, pt. 26, p. 6539, 1931. 33 Iredale, Tom, A collation of the molluscan parts of the Synopses of the Contents of the British Museum, 1838-1845 ; Malacological Soc., London, vol. 10. p. 308, 1913.

590 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

fossil state a group characterized by peculiarities of the operculum and proposed the name Pseudotorinia for the fossil shells which share with Torinia a rounded periphery and an ornate sculpture pattern.
Arehiteetoniea (Pseudotorinia) bisulcata (D'Qrbigny)
1853. Solarium bisulcatum D'Orbigny, Sagra, R. de la, Histoire physique, politique, et naturelle de 1'ile de Cuba, pt. 2 (Mollusques), vol. 2, p. 66, pi. 19, figs. 17-20.
1874. Solarium semidecussatum Guppy, Geol. Mag., new ser., dec. 2, vol. 1, p. 438, pi. 18, fig. 14 (in part).
1887. fTorinia bisulcata (D'Orbigny) Tryon, Manual of conchology, vol. 9, p. 22, pi. 6, figs. 14-16.
Coquille orbiculaire. tres cleprimee, ornee, en dessus, de cinq cotes peu elevees, avec lesquelles viennent se croiser d'autres cotes longitudinales, regulieres, qui rendent toute la coquille comme granuleuse; en dessous il y a six cotes; des deux cotes les cotes laterales sont les plus larges, et c'est mdme la reunion des cotes externes qu'on voit representer un double bourrelet sur le pourtour de la coquille. Spire tres courte, obtuse, composee de six tours; ombilic assez large, canalicule en dedans, crenele sur ,ses bords et borde, exterieurement, de deux cotes plus larges que les autres. Bouche subarrondie.
Elle habite la Jamai'que et la Martinique. D'Orbigny, 1853.
Because of the relatively finer, more subdued sculpture, two very young forms have been referred tentatively to this species rather than to the closely allied A. nupera Conrad. Guppy's S. semidecussatum was described from two juveniles, one of which is almost certainly this species; the other is probably a Solariella.
Arehiteetoniea nupera Conrad, apparently restricted to the Yorktown, is possibly the cool water analog of the warmer-water A. bisulcata.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality ?2213r.
Family TTTRRITELLIDAE
Genus TtTRBITELLA Lamarck
1799. Turritella, Lamarck, Soc. histoire nat. Paris Mem., Prodrome d'une nouvelle classification des coquilles, p. 74.
Type by monotypy: Turbo terebra Linnaeus. Recent in the China Sea and the Gulf of Siam.
A slender, imperforate, polygyrate form, spirally sculptured. Aperture holostomous, oval, subcircular or subquadrate. Outer lip thin, simple, sinuous, retractive posteriorly, slightly produced anteriorly in most species. Columella simple, concave. Posterior portion of shell vacant and partitioned at each half turn.
Before the end of the Cretaceous, Turritella had become one of the more conspicuous elements in the gastropod faunas of North America. The genus culminated during the Tertiary, and was represented at that time by a large number of prolific species. In the Recent seas, it is relatively meager and confined, largely to the warm waters of the Old World.
A number of classifications of Turritella have been made, none of them adequate for the grouping of the small diversified Alum Bluff assemblage of species.

Among the most careful of the later studies is that of Guillaume. 34 Guillaume rejected the results of an attempt of Cossmanu 35 to include under a few subgenera a large number of widely distributed fossil and Recent species. Two characters have been stressed in the later, more important attempts at classification: (1) The trace of the growth lines; (2) the nuclear arid juvenile characters, the shape of the whorls and the number and order of appearance of the spirals. In Cossmann's classification, species with similar growth line patterns may be placed in different subgenera; and species with different patterns of growth lines in the same subgenera. Guillaume introduced no new names, but he assembled the species under "Groupes'' one typified by T. kybrida Deshayes, another by T. imbricataria Lamarck, etc. Merriam 36 grouped the mass of the fossil West Coast Turricellas under a certain number of "stocks" each typified by a single species. Unlike Guillaume, who based his separations on the growth trace alone, Merriam considered also the apical angle, and particularly the characters of the early whorls. Neither Guillaume nor Merriam attempted to separate the mass of their material into subgenera iior did either one introduce any new superspecific names.
Turritella terebra Linnaeus, the type of the genus is a slender species of 30 to 35 rounded whorls. The maximum height may exceed 150 millimeters, and a height of 120 millimeters is common. The posterior part of the adult whorl is flattened a little in front of the channelled suture, and the spirals are less prominent than on the medial and anterior portions of the shell. The aperture is oval and higher than it is wide. The earliest whorls increase very slowly in diameter and are asymmetrically rounded. The growth lines are strongly retractive across the flattened posterior area but nearly vertical medially and anteriorly. Judging from the number of specimens in the collection, the species seems to be fairly common in the China Sea and the Gulf of Siam and south to Singapore.
No East Coast Tertiary species is sufficiently like the genotype to be placed with it in a restricted subgenus.
Turritella subgrimdifera Dall
Plate LVII, figure 1
1892. Turritella suitgrundifera Dall, Wagner Free lust. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 313, pi. 22, fig. 23.
Shell thin, acute, with twenty-four sharply carinated sculptured whorls and a nucleus of two smooth, swollen whorls, of which the first is set obliquely to the axis of the adult shell;
34 Guillaume, Louis, Essai sur la classification des Turritelles; ainsi que sur leur evolution et leurs migrations, depuis le debut des temps tertiaires : Soc. Ge"ol. France, ser. 4, t. 24, pp. 281-311, pis. 10, 11 ; 33 text figs., 1924.
85 Cossmann, Maurice/ Bssais de Paleoconchologie comparee, vol. 9, pp. 106-130, August, 1912.
86 Merriam, Charles W., Fossil Turritellas from the Pacific Coast Region of North America; Univ. California Pub., Dept. Geol. Sci., Bull., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1-214, pis. 1-41, 19 text figs., 1 map, 1941.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOrODA

591

transverse sculpture only of lines of growth, which are not prominent and rarely undulate even the finest of the spirals; the periphery of the whorl is near the suture in front, and is ornamented with an extremely .sharp keel, which overhangs, like eaves, the succeeding whorl; above this are four narrow less prominent keels or elevated spirals, with much wider about equal interspaces, which on the later whorls carry a fine intercalary spiral line; the surface is polished, but shows traces under the lens of microscopic spiral striae; in front of the main carina are one or two elevated spirals between it and the almost invisible suture; the base inside of the sutural line is distantly spirally sculptured and rather convex; the aperture is subquadrate, the pillar arched, thin, and twisted so as to offer a minutely pervious axis; the throat is provided with strong sharp lirae independent of the sculpture. Lon. of shell [estimated] 77; max. diam. of base 17 millimeters.
This is a very elegant and distinct species which in some of Its features faintly recalls T. imbricataria Lam. of the Parisian Eocene.
The American species which is nearest to it in form, though a much smaller shell, is the unfigured T. alticostata from the Miocene of Virginia and Maryland. This has been identified from Conrad's type by Mr. Harris, but it has rounded, closeset threads and is only about half the size of the Chipola species. T. alticostata .will probably turn out to be a carinated variety of T. variabilis.
It occasionally happens that the main carina in T. subffrundifera is no larger'than the other, in which case, of course, the whorls have a more rounded appearance. But these specimens are rare compared with the carinated, which seems to be the normal form. It is the only fossil species here referred to with sharp lirae in the throat; the others have the throat quite smooth except in cases where the sculpture is reflected by sulci in the interior of the aperture. Dall, 1890.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113440. Type locality: No. 2214, Teumile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.
The two to three nuclear whorls are narrow, inflated and smooth; the initial whorl, tilted slightly. The first five or six of the sculptured whorls are convex and carinated medially. The posterior of the two initial spirals outlines the periphery; the anterior spiral is midway between the periphery and the suture line. With the increasing angularity of the whorl, the anterior spiral becomes increasingly prominent relatively.
The growth lines are strongly retractive posteriorly and feebly arcuate medially and anteriorly. Merriam (ibid, p. 48) has noted the similarity of T. subgrundifera to the T. ocayana group of the middle Miocene of California and Lower California.
Turritella imbricataria, Lamarck, mentioned by Dall, is a synonym of Haustator galllcus Montfort, the monotype of Haustator, a group characterized by strongly insinuated growth lines. The resemblance of T. subgrundifem to the Haustator group is not fundamental. The growth traces differ, and though I have not seen perfect tips of T. imbricataria, the earliest whorls of T. carimfera Deshayes, which Guillaume considers a varietal form of T. imbricataria, have straight sides separated by channeled sutures and are girdled with three equal lirae symmetrically disposed on the whorl.

Pilsbry and Brown, 1917,' reported Turritella subgrundifera from Cartagenq,, Colombia. Spieker, 1922, has noted its resemblance to infracarinata Grzybowski of the Zorritos formation of Peru.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609p? 7893P, 2212C, 2214C, 2213C, 2564C, 3419C, 7151P, 2211% 7183a, 2566r, 7468?; Oak Grove sand, localities 2646», 5632P, 563F, 5633r, 996F.
Turritella aleida Dall
Plate LVII, figure 2
1896. Turritella aleida Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Proc., vol. 18, No. 1035, p. 23.
1903. Turritella aleida Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 6, p. 1632, pi. 59, fig. 26.
Shell resembling T. aequistriata, Conrad, but more acute and more rapidly enlarging, shorter, with the anterior ridge on the whorl compressed and almost keeled, closer to the suture in front, to which the base drops abruptly, and, on the final base, flatter; owing to the form of the base and the constriction of the upper part of the whorl, the turns appear to overhang the suture. Length, 85; diameter, 21.5 mm., in a specimen with 17 whorls. Dall, 1896.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 135054. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. Shell moderately large and stout for the genus. Whorls commonly exceeding 20, regularly increasing in size, rudely trapezoidal, conspicuously carinated a little behind the suture and more or less obscurely so a little in front of the median horizontal. Periphery of body rounded or obscurely angulated; a tendency toward a second angulation along a line which the suture would follow if produced. Protoconch small, smooth, inflated, even a little bulbous, paucispiral; line of demarcation between conch and protoconch rather obscure. Sculpture initiated gradually on the third whorl of the shell, with a medial spiral liration strong enough to feebly carinate the whorl and fainter lirae, one in front of and another behind, the periphery; additional spirals rapidly introduced. Medial carina conspicuous, as a rule, until the eighth or tenth volution, where a keel, developed directly behind the suture, becomes increasingly prominent toward the aperture; area behind the medial keel gently sloping to the suture or in the strongly carinate forms feebly concave; area between the two keels more or less concave, the degree of depression varying with the strength of the carinae; anterior carina overhanging the succeeding volution. Adult sculpture of 25 to 40 fine, crowded lirae. Incremeutals strongly retractive posteriorly, broadly and very feebly arcuate medially and anteriorly. Basal lirae regularly spaced, the interspaces increasingly wider toward the periphery. Suture lines distinct, feebly impressed, overhung by the anterior carina of the preceding volution. Aperture rudely quadrate. Outer lip so thin that it is rarely preserved intact, ob-

592 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

tusely angulated by the anterior carina and in the bicarinate individuals by the medial carina as well; inner lip strongly concave, reinforced along its margin. Parietal wall thinly glazed; throat nonlirate.
Turritella alcida Ball is peculiarly characteristic of the Oak Grove fauna. It is exceedingly abundant at that horizon and has not been recognized elsewhere. It differs from T. subgrundifera Ball, which occurs along the Yellow Eiver, though never abundantly, in the development of a medial carina, the finer and very much more crowded spirals, and the nonlirate throat. The sculpture pattern of T. alcida suggests that of T. gatunensis Conrad, but the Gatun shell is smaller than that from Florida, and the whorls are less flattened. A closer analog and quite possibly a descendant is T. aequistriata Conrad of the Chesapeake Miocene. The Miocene species is smaller, with a more regular and less crowded sculpture, but it resembles the Oak Grove species in its general outline, its incipient medial carina, and its type of sculpture.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646a, 5632C, 5631P, 5630P, 5633P, 7054C, 9961P.
Turritella alcida bicarinata Gardner, n. subsp.
Plate LVII, figure 3
Shell rather large and heavy, of about 20 volutions. Nucleus paucispiral, similar to that of T. alcida s.s. Whorls of conch bicarinate; the medial carina first to be developed, strongest on the earlier whorls, though persistent to the aperture; in the juvenile growth stage, the anterior carina less prominent than the medial, approximately equal to it in the adolescent, and more prominent in the adult. Intercarinal area strongly concave; area between medial carina and posterior suture feebly concave; whorl abruptly contracted in front of the anterior carina. Periphery of body obtuse, with a suggestion of an angulation along the line which the suture would follow if produced. Surface, as in T. alcida s.s., ornamented with 25 to 40 fine and crowded lirae, somewhat unequal in size. Sculpture on base similar to that on the spire, minutely crenulate; about half a dozen spirals less feeble than the rest, regularly spaced but increasingly crowded toward the axis. Incrementals, as in T. alcida,, strongly retractive posteriorly, approaching the vertical medially and anteriorly. Suture lines distinct but overhung by the carina of the preceding whorl. Aperture rudely quadrate. Outer lip obtusely angulated by the medial and anterior keels, retractive posteriorly as in T. alcida s.s. Inner lip concave, reinforced. Parietal wall washed with a thin enamel.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 73 millimeters; maximum diameter, 19.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350427. Type locality: No. 5630,100 yards below Oak Grove, Yellow Eiver, Okaloosa County, Fla.

It is with some hesitation that the individuals in question are isolated even subspecifically, so obvious is the close relationship in even the end members. However, they are readily separable by the relatively greater prominence of the medial carina, and the differences are present at an early stage. The distribution of the subspecies is similar to that of T. alcida Dall s.s., although it is less abundant than the normal form.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2302p, 7468P; Oak Grove sand, localities 3386r, 3385r, 2646C, 5632P, 5631r, 5630?, 5633P, 7054P.
Turritella gatunensis blountensis Mansfield
Plate LVII, figures ?11, ?12
1935. Turritella gatunensis blountensis Mansfield, Florida Dept. Cons., Geol. Bull. 12, p. 41, pi. 4, figs. 1, 2.
Shell of medium size, moderately slender and constricted at the excavated sutures. Earliest whorls rounded and weakly medially carinated. On the following whorls a basal spiral appears, weak at first but soon becoming as strong as the medial one, forming between them a shallow depression. Another spiral comes in on the later whorls on the posterior slope, which becomes anteriorly nearly as strong as the one in front of it. In addition to the primary spirals, secondary and tertiary spirals overrun the whorls. The suture winds against the base of the preceding whorl.
The cotypes (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 373151) measure: Specimen with preserved earlier whorls. Length, 41 millimeters; diameter, 8 millimeters. Specimen with lost earlier whorls. Length, 40 millimeters; diameter, 12 millimeters.
Turritclla- gatunensis Conrad is closely related to the new subspecies but differs from the latter in having more medially carinate early whorls and an earlier development of the basal spiral. It also has a less slender shell than the new subspecies.
Type locality: No. 12046, Vaughran Creek, upper locality, Walton County. Fla. Mansfield, 1935.
Mansfield has reported his species from several localities in the Area zone of the Choctaw tiatcliee formation, and he has also observed that "four small specimens at locality 5618, 3y2 miles southwest of DeFuniak Springs, Fla., uppermost bed of Shoal Eiver formation, appear to belong to the new subspecies." The juveniles figured in this report are from locality Sta. 10603, another outcrop of the high Shoal Eiver, probably synchronous with that 3*/2 miles southwest of DeFuniak Springs.
The whorls are a little higher in the specimens from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, than they are in those from Vaughan Creek, but the species represented must certainly be close if not identical.
The trace of the growth lines is similar to that in Turritella subgrundifera and T. alcida., and the general characters of the early whorls are also similar.
The figured juvenile (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498024) is 9.3 millimeters high and 2.8 millimeters in diameter. The older individual (also U. S. Nat. Mus. 498024) is 15.5 millimeters high and 5.1 millimeters in diameter.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 10603r.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

593

Turritella segmenta Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figures 13, 14
Shell small and rather slender, the early whorls inflated medially, the later volutions carinate behind the suture, probably about 20 in number in the perfect adult shell. Protoconch not well preserved in any of the material available, but doubtless small, smooth, acute, and paucispiral. First 8 or 9 whorls of conch evenly convex, quite strongly constricted at the sutures, sculptured with microscopically fine, sharp, linear threadlets approximating 30 or 35 in number, subequal in some individuals, in others every fifth or sixth lira less feeble than the rest; interspaces linear. Carina initiated about the eighth or ninth volution at or a little in front of the median line, increasing in strength toward the aperture and emphasized by the prominent spiral that outlines it; a second keel developed shortly after the first directly behind the suture line. Adult whorls gently sloping from the posterior suture to the medial carina, straight-sided or nearly so between the medial and anterior carinas and very strongly and abruptly constricted in front of the anterior carina. Shoulder of adult sculptured with approximately 20 lirae, equisized except for the one about halfway between the suture and the keel, which is commonly more prominent than the rest, and breaks the even profile of the shoulder. Anterior keel outlined by a spiral which is only a little less prominent than that which crowns the periphery, and a little behind it another almost or equally prominent, while a third is developed at a similar distance in front of it but is commonly more or less obscured by its position on the under surface of the keel, although in the older forms it outlines the carina. Interspaces between the three anterior primaries slightly concave and finely lirate; space in front of the periphery, also feebly concave and sculptured with 10 or 12 linear threadlets; under surface of anterior keel almost horizontal in some individuals and closely lirated. Suture line distinct but concealed by the overhanging whorl behind it. Aperture holostomous, broadly oval. Outer lip thin, sharp, and obscurely angulated at the base. Inner lip evenly concave, reinforced. Parietal wall rather heavily glazed; throat strongly lirate in some individuals, not at all in others.
Dimensions, estimated from two cotypes, which may be parts of a single individual: Height, 38 millimeters; maximum diameter, 7.5 millimeters.
Cotypes: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371863.
Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal Kiver, Walton County, Fla.
Turritella segmenta is not confusable with any of the species with which it is associated. The early whorls suggest T. plebeia Say, of the Chesapeake Miocene, in contour and sculpture, but T. plebeia shows no tendency toward the development of abruptly overhanging

whorls in later life. The later whorls of T. segmenta recall in outline and general sculpture pattern those of T. gatunensis Conrad, but the early whorls of, T. segmenta seem to be rounded and obscurely carinate through a longer growth period than those of T. gatunensis. T. segmenta may be an antecedent form of T. subannulata Heilprin, most closely resembling the variety T. subannulata acropora Dall, possibly through T. subannulata jacksonensis Mansfield from the Ecphora zone of the Choctawatcb.ee formation at Jackson Bluff, Leon County, Fla. Turritella Uackwaterensis Mansfield, 1937, probably from the Tampa limestone, may be a still earlier ancestral type. The knownrepresentatives of T. segmenta are confined to the Shoal Kiver beds in Walton County and are not abundant even within that restricted area.
Occurrence: Shoal Kiver formation, localities 3742p , 5080r, 5618r.
Subgenus TOECUIiA Gray
1847. Torcula Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 155.
Type by original designation: Turbo exoletus Linnaeus. Recent in the Gulf of Mexico and the West Indies in 45 to 170 fathoms (C. W. Johnson) ; Dry Tortugas in 30 to 35 fathoms (C. W. Merriam).
Shell rather small, slender, polygyrate. Apical angle very small, not far from 15°. Only about two narrow, polished nuclear whorls, the initial whorl tilted slightly, the second turn inflated but tending to flatten toward its close. Line between conch and protoconch obscure, indicated by duller texture of shell of conch. The four or five earliest whorls of conch inflated and keeled anteriorly, the whorls rapidly flattening and the anterior keel becoming a low anterior spiral; posterior spiral introduced on about the fourth or fifth whorl of the genotype. Original spirals increasingly strong, becoming the prominent anterior and posterior cords in the adult; cords rarely simple, usually beaded by the growth lines which override them. Growth lines strongly arcuate and symmetrically disposed between the sutures.
Torcula, includes a number of Tertiary and a few later species. The tertiary forms are prolific in the warm temperate and tropical waters of the Province of the Gulf of Mexico and the West Indies. The Recent species are not so common and live in deeper water. Torcula probably reached the peak of development during the middle Miocene. It includes T, altilira and allied forms, prolific in the Canal Zone and Costa Rica, allied species in Jamaica and the Dominican Republic, in northern South America, and in Ecuador and Peru on the Pacific Coast, and the T. "inesana stock" of Merriam in central and southern California and in Lower California.

594 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Turritella (Torcula) dalli Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figures 4, 5
1892. Turritella terebriformis Conrad. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 311 (in part).
Not Turritella terebriformis Conrad, 1863. Name only.
The locality from which Conrad's type specimen was collected is Greensboro, Md. Martin 37 was doubtless correct in referring Conrad's type of T. terebriformis to T. variabilis var. alticostata. The Florida form differs from the Maryland species in its flatter whorls, sharper and more elevated primary sculpture, more accentuated incremental, and more shallow sutures. The initial whorl of the Chipola species is bulbous, the succeeding volution low and angulated at the periphery, and the early whorls of the conch smooth and gently rounded. In the Maryland species, on the other hand, the earliest whorl is small and obtuse and the succeeding turn rather slender and gently convex, the sculpture is initiated very early on the conch, certainly not later than the third volution and in the form of two subequal spirals symmetrically spaced between the sutures. The differences both in the general aspect and in the details of the sculpture seem sufficiently great to demand the separation of the northern and the southern races. Since the Maryland form received Conrad's name, a new one must be given to the Florida shell.
The nuclear and early post-nuclear whorls of T'. dalli have been lost. The earliest remaining whorls are high and narrow with an obscure carinal lira set about twothirds the distance from the posterior to the anterior suture. In front of this slight keel, the whorl is feebly constricted. The second spiral to be introduced is that which revolves a little in front of the posterior suture. A third spiral is introduced during adolescence directly behind the anterior suture. On the adult whorls the sculpture is strong but rather simple. The carinal spiral of the juvenile whorls remains the strongest of the three and is crenated by the incrementals. The posterior spiral is usually double and less strongly crenate than that in front of it. Between them is a strongly concave medial area sculptured only with incrementals. The anterior spiral holds its position directly behind the suture and is overridden with fine lirae. The incrementals are sharp and sinuated; the axis of the sinus falls symmetrically on the concave area between the two strongest spirals. The sutures are deeply impressed. The base is broadly rounded and obscurely lirate. The aperture is subcircular and holostomous, the outer lip thin and sharp, not preserved entire. The inner margin is strongly concave, the parietal wash moderately heavy and widely spread, the pillar reinforced.
37 Martin, G. C., Gastropoda, in Case, E. C., and others, Systematic paleontology of the Miocene deposits of Maryland : Maryland Geol. Survey, Miocene (text), p. 237, 1904.

Dimensions of incomplete holotype: Height, 55.5 millimeters; diameter, 19.0 millimeters. Dimensions of immature paratype: Height, 47.5 millimeters, diameter, 11.0 millimeters.
Holotype and paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329008. Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed, Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla. Turritella (Torcula) dalli is one of the earliest members of the group that includes the more ornate T. waltonensis from the Shoal River and T. guppyi Cossmann from the Bowden beds. The early whorls of the three species mentioned are very similar. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 7893P, 2212P, 2213a, 2564C, 3419C, 7151P, 2211P, 7183P, 7468P; Oak Grove sand, locality 3385?.
Turritella (Torcula) waltonensis Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figure 16
Shell high, slender, porcelaneous in texture. Whorls increasing gradually in size, approximately 30 in the adult shell. Apical angle about 10°. Protoconch very small, smooth, paucispiral; initial half turn partially immersed; succeeding turns strongly inflated. Line of demarcation between conch and protoconch not distinct but probably within the second complete volution; indicated by the gradual establishment of a carina, at first medial but migrating toward the anterior portion of the whorl and gradually pinching into a prominent primary spiral, which on the later whorls revolves a little less than halfway between the median horizontal and the anterior suture; a second spiral introduced at a similar distance behind the median line, rapidly increasing in prominence until it equals that in front of it; minute riblets developed by the incrementals first on the posterior spiral, later on the anterior; a third primary spiral introduced directly behind the anterior suture at about the tenth or eleventh whorl but feebler than the two behind it and only slightly affected by the incrementals. Entire surface threaded with microscopically fine lirae, the medial threadlet becoming increasingly vigorous and at about the twentieth whorl minutely beaded by the growth lines; an additional spiral introduced in the adults directly behind the posterior primary and in some individuals merged with it. Normal adult sculpture thus consisting of two prominent tuberculate spirals symmetrically placed with respect to the sutures, the posterior commonly a little the heavier, separated from one another by a strongly concave area in which a finely crenulated lira revolves at or just in front of the median line; a prominent cord directly behind the anterior suture and a finer beaded lira directly behind the posterior spiral; the entire surface microscopically lirate, the threadlets most distinct on the elevated surfaces. Incrementals overriding the spirals and conspicuously crenulating all ex-

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

595

cept the anterior spiral; strongly arcuate, thus producing a series of minute, protractive riblets on the anterior portion of the whorl and retractive riblets on the posterior portion. Suture lines distinct but inconspicuous. Periphery of body sharply outlined by the cord, which on the spire follows the posterior margin of the suture. Base in front of the keel slightly depressed, then elevated and arching feebly to the columella. Basal surface smooth except for vigorous incrementals. Aperture rudely quadrate, the outer lip rather heavy, obtusely angulated at the periphery. Columella lip evenly concave, reinforced. Parietal wall thinly glazed; throat lirate or nonlirate, the lirae when present corresponding in position to the interspirals on the exterior.
Dimensions of holotype: Height estimated, 85 ± millimeters; height of incomplete specimen, 46 millimeters ; diameter, 15.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371862. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.
Turritella (Torcula) waltonensis is another ornate type exceedingly abundant in the Shoal River beds, particularly at the type locality. Though readily recognizable in the entirety of its characters, it is inconstant in details. The axial sculpture is much more prominent in some individuals than in others and in the gerontic stage tends to evanesce toward the aperture. The posterior spiral may be a fine, sharply beaded threadlet distinct from the primary in front of it, or it may be low and broad and more or less merged with the primary. The posterior primary may be equal to or less prominent than the anterior, though normally it is the more elevated. In the late whorls of old and large individuals the median spiral is obsolete.
The species is probably the ornate analog in the Walton County fauna of T. dalli of the Chipola beds. In T. dalli the axial sculpture is very feeble, although the primaries, particularly that in front of the median line, may be obscurely crenulated. The spiral directly behind the suture is relatively stronger in the Chipola form and more similar in character to the primary behind it. The median spiral is not developed, and the fine posterior spiral is not so distinct as that of T. waltonensis. T. dalli is on the whole a larger, less slender, and much heavier form, with a more strongly serrate profile.
Turritella (Torcula) waltonensis is also the representative of one of the most prolific and widespread groups of the mid-American Turritellas in middle Miocene time. Many of these have been included under Turritella altilira Conrad, an abundant and characteristic species in the Gatun formation but, according to Olsson, 1922, "limited to the small Gatun sedimentary basin of the Canal Zone and the adjacent

Province of Colon." Closely allied species or subspecies include T. costaricensis Olsson, 1922, from Costa Rica; T. cMriquiensis Olsson, 1922, from Costa Rica and Trinidad (Mansfield, 1925) ; T. carlottae Hodson, 1925, not Watson, 1881, from Venezuela and the Gurabo formation of Santo Domingo; T. calestemma Brown and Pilsbry from Haiti ; and in the higher Miocene, T. guppyi Cossmann of the Bowden beds of Jamaica. Turritella perattenuata Heilprin of the Caloosahatchee Pliocene of Florida may be a descendant.
The associated specimen shown in figure 17 (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498023') from locality 14436, is a fragment of an unidentified species in which the sculpture pattern is similar to that of T. altilira Conrad. It differs from T. waltonensis in the more vigorous spirals and in the development of several secondaries rather than a single one in the concave area between the two primaries. The fragment differs from T. altilw*a, in the relatively less prominent posterior spiral and the less deeply impressed sutures. * Occurrence : Shoal River formation, localities 3856pr, 2645P, 3732C, 3742Pr, 3731», 5080a, 5184a, 5195», 10612*.
Turritella (Torcula?) sp.
Plate LVII, figure 15
Shell small, exceedingly slender. Whorls numerous, so flattened laterally that the profile of the spire is almost a straight line. Initial 3 or 4 whorls feebly inflated and obscurely unicarinate, the carinal spiral continued as the posterior of the 2 faint primary threadlets of the later whorls ; anterior threadlet commonly a little less feeble than the posterior on the adolescent and adult whorls; surface crowded with other spiral lirae, too faint to be visible except under high magnification. Growth lines distinct, the sinus deep and symmetrically disposed between the -primary spirals, the anterior arm of the U, however, a little shorter than the posterior. Sutures feebly impressed in the adolescent stages, more deeply in the adult.
Dimensions of incomplete specimen: Height, 23 millimeters; diameter, 5.6 millimeters.
Figured specimen : U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498025. Locality: No. 10603, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle and 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. These small, slender, acutely tapering forms, smooth to the unaided eye, were originally set aside as the young of an undescribed species, but they appear in all the collections made in the vicinity of Whites Creek and there are no comparable adults, either associated with them or in our other collections from the later Tertiary of Florida. The species most closely allied may be the varietal form T. obsolete/, Dall, 1892, of the

596 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Caloosahatchee species, Turritella perattenuata Heilprin. The variety is characterized by a "surface destitute of spiral sculpture except the angular borders of the equatorial sulcus and a faint line behind the suture."
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, localities, 10603P, 10608P.
Section EUBYTOEUS Gardner, n. sec.
Type by original designation: Turritella mixta Ball. Chipola formation (lower Miocene) of Florida.
Eurytorm resembles Torcula in the juvenile characters and in the direction of the growth lines. It differs from Torcula, in the broader apical angle and base and the flat-sided, trapezoidal whorls forming an evenly tapering cone. The sculpture pattern does not differ greatly from that of some of the species of Torcula, but the spirals are much less prominent and scarcely interrupt the regular profile of the spire.
The section is best represented in the lower Miocene of Florida, not only in the Chipola formation but in the Tampa limestone as well. It may also have a representation in the Suwanee limestone.
Turritella (Torcula?) mixta Dall
Plate LVI1, figure 7
1892. Turritella indenta var. mixta Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 309.
This variety has the basal carina double as in well-developed specimens of the type, together with the equatorial spiral sculpture of T. bipertita. The lines of growth are periodically sharp and elevated, and the sides of the whorls are comparatively fiat. The apical whorls are only faintly sculptured, and the nucleus is very minute. The best-preserved specimen measures 60 [62] millimeters long and has a maximum diameter of 21.5 [22.0] millimeters. These specimens are somewhat more compact than the type, though it is quite variable in this respect. Dall, 1892.
Topotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113476. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Shell elongate-conic, the base broad, the 15 to 20 whorls laterally compressed and regularly increasing in size. Nuclear characters not known. Early whorls of conch obscurely lirate directly behind the anterior suture, keeled a little in front of the median horizontal and adorned posteriorly with a double thread; additional spirals later introduced. Sculpture of adult whorls complex; directly behind the suture, a stout, rounded cord on which 3 or 4 fine, sharp lirae are developed; this cord second in prominence only to the cord behind it, which is the carinal cord of the early whorls; medial portion, in holotype, sculptured with rather obscurely defined fillets, the broadest and flattest representing the posterior of the 3 original spirals. Microscopically fine spiral striae overrunning the whorl from suture to suture, least faint on the pos-

terior and medial portions. Incrementals sharply arcuate, strong enough to crenulate the spirals. Suture lines distinct, impressed. Base rounded, its circumference outlined by the anterior spiral of the earlier whorls; base feebly depressed in front of the cord, not sculptured except for accentuated growth lines and resting stages. Aperture holostomous, subquadrate. Outer lip thin, sharp, sinuous, obtusely angulated at the periphery; incrementals strongly recurved, the axis of the sinus, like that of the Turritella hybrida group, falling at or a little in front of the posterior of the original spirals. Inner lip strongly and evenly concave, reinforced with a thin callus. Umbilicus imperforate.
Because of the closer coiling and difference in sculpture detail, Turritella (Torcula) mixta Dall should be specifically isolated from the Maryland species, T. indenta. It is, indeed, less suggestive of T. indenta than of T. chipolana Dall, a more slender and more sharply sculptured race, adorned with three subequal and subequispaced moniliform spirals.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212r, 2213r, 3419r.
Turritella (Torcula?) jacula Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figure 6
Shell a rather slender obelisk drawn out into a straight-sided spire that tapers at an angle of about 15 degrees. Apical whorls and body lost. Earliest whorl preserved displaying a trilirate sculpture, the anterior simple and directly behind the suture line, a position which it holds throughout the life of the shell, the intermediate spiral placed a little in front of the median horizontal, the posterior a little in front of the posterior suture and inclined to be beaded; a fourth spiral introduced between the intermediate and the posterior spiral, and later, a fifth between the posterior spiral and the suture; adult whorls of holotype sculptured with 4 beaded spirals, the 2 pairs separated by a concave channel threaded by a fine beaded lira; the posterior of each pair of spirals slightly stronger than that behind it, and representing respectively the medial and the posterior of the original spirals; entire surface of whorl finely lirate, the lirae least fine upon the broad anterior spiral. Incrementals beading the spirals and deeply sinuated, the axis of the sinus symmetrically disposed on the channel between the 2 pairs of strong beaded spirals. Characters of body and of aperture unknown.
Dimensions of imperfect holotype: Height, 36 millimeters; diameter, 12 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498021. Type locality: No. 10603, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

597

Turritella (Torcula) jacula is closely related to T. mitfta Ball from the Chipola formation. Its shell is more slender and has a more definite sculpture pattern than that of T. mirta, but it may well be in the direct line of descent from that species. The resemblance to Turritella burdeiii Tuomey and Holmes from the Duplin formation of South Carolina may be even more striking. Fragments indicate that the species reaches dimensions double those of the figured holotype. The range of variation is considerable; the posterior pair of beaded spirals on the body may be decidedly less elevated and more simple than those in front of them. The slenderer individuals approach T. waltonensis in general aspect, but T. waltonensis is consistently more slender and differs slightly in sculpture detail; T. jacula is characterized by two pairs of beaded spirals with a narrow, threaded groove between them.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 10603C, 10608C.
Turritella (Torcula?) chipolana Dall
Plate LVII, figure 8
1S92. Turritella chipolana Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt 2, p. 312, pi. 22, fig. 24.
1914. Turritella chipolana Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 98.
Shell strong, acute-conic, of eighteen or more whorls; nucleus decollate; early whorls showing one undulated posterior and one plain anterior spiral rib, with a less prominent one behind the suture; a fourth appears between the first two, and on the later whorls nearly equals them in size; on the last whorl we find at the basal margin a squarish primary spiral under which the suture is closely and evenly appressed; behind this is the most prominent spiral, then two slightly smaller, between which is the equatorial sulc-us, in the middle of which is a very fine, sharp undulated line; between the last-mentioned primary and the suture behind it are two somewhat obscure spirals successively smaller; the equatorial and two anterior interspaces are nearly equal in width and channeled rather than excavated; the whole surface of the shell is covered with obscure spiral striations; the transverse sculpture undulates all the spirals on the later whorls and is formed by the lines of growth, which in some specimens are elevated and imbricate at intervals; the whorls are strongly sculptured to the tip and rather rounded, the suture distinct, but nowhere discontinuous; the base in the young is fiattish, somewhat excavated inside the marginal rib, the inner edge of the excavation forming a sort of disk about the pillar; in the adult the base is more convex, but without distinct spiral ribbing; the pillar is thin, arched,. and so twisted that the axis of the shell, vertically regarded, is somewhat pervious; the aperture is somewhat rounded. Lon. of shell 68; max. diam. of base 18 millimeters.
This species, which appears to be rare, is one of the most elegantly sculptured of the group. It recalls T. mississippiensis Conrad, from the Vicksburg, which is natter and less ornamented. T. indenta var. mixta has a similar succession of spirals on the whorl, but they are comparatively feeble and grow feebler up the spire, while in T. chipolana they are, if anything, stronger. The latter is more slender, with rounder whorls and no tendency to discontinuity at the suture. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113442.

Type locality: No. 2212, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
This fine species has not been taken in any of the later collections.
Occurrence: Chipola formation localities 2212r, 2213 r .
Superfamily BISSOACEA Family VITRINELLIDAE
*
Confusion is prevalent throughout the Skeneid and Vitrinellid taxonomy. A knowledge of the animals is essential for a correct classification, and without that it seems hardly worth while to attempt an interpretation of the tangled relationships of the genera included under the Vitrinellidae and other families of small discoidal forms. Two important series of papers are coming out at the present time. 88 They are concerned exclusively with the Recent species but are sure to throw light on the relationships of their Tertiary ancestors.
Genus VITBINELLA C. B. Adams
1850. Yitrinella C. B. Adams. Monograph of Vitrinella, Amherst, Mass., p. 3.
Type by subsequent designation (Bush, Connecticut Acacl. Arts and Sci. Trans., vol. 10, p. 105, 1897): Vitrinella helicoidea C. B. Adams. Recent off Jamaica.
Adams' genus included small, vitreous shells of turbinate outline, with a large subcircular aperture, and with or without an open umbilicus.
Katherine Bush in 1897 restricted the genus as follows :
I propose V. helicoidea as the type and restrict the genus to small, more or less hyaline, low-spired shells of few convex whorls, having a moderate-sized deep umbilicus; nearly circular, oblique aperture, with simple more or less continuous peritreme, modified on the body whorl into a more or less conspicuous glaze, which may be absent in the young; columellar margin often flattened in the adult, having the appearance of being thickened, and angulated at the lower, outer edge.
Periphery rounded: Umbilical carina thickened, not visible for any distance within the pit...... "Vitrinella" seminola Gardner, n. sp. Umbilical carina acute, not thickened, visible within the pit almost to the apex.................................. "Vitrinella" waltonla Gardner, n. sp.
Periphery obtusely angulated................................ "Vitrmella," excavata Gardner, n. sp.
"Vitrinella" seminola Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LX, figure 18-20
Shell minute, moderately heavy for the genus, depressed turbinate. Whorls closely appressed, 5 includ-
38 Pilsbry, H. A., and McGinty, T. L., Cyclostrematidae and Vitrinellidae of Florida : Nautilus, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 1-13, pis. 1, 2, July 1945; no. 2, pp. 52-59, pi. 6, October 1945 ; no. 3, pp. 77-83, pi. 8, January 1946 ; to be continued. Pilsbry, H. A., and Olsson, A. A., Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 97, pp. 249-278, pis. 22-30, December 27, 1945.

598 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

ing the nucleus, which is very small and probably twice-coiled. Volutions of conch increasing rather rapidly in size, broadly and feebly inflated, the body whorl flattened in front of the suture, smoothly rounded at the periphery. Base very feebly convex. Surface polished, lineated in one individual, but not in the type, with microscopically fine, close-set striae visible only under high magnification, least feeble near the suture. Sutures obscure, inclined to creep up on the preceding whorl. Aperture oblique to the axis, sinuous, feebly constricted at the periphery of the body and expanded behind it, strongly concave along the columellar margin. Parietal wall heavily glazed. Peritreme continuous, the outer lip expanded, the inner lip constricted and reinforced directly behind the pillar with a heavy callus, apparently the remnant of a former marginal thickening. Umbilicus deep but not very wide, revealing the rounded base of the preceding whorl; outlined externally by an obscure keel. Callus thinly spread over a little less than half the basal area.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.7 millimeters.
Holotype: TL S. Nat. Mus. 351624. Type locality: No. 3748, old mill at Summerville, 1 mile east of Argyle, Walton County, Fla. ''Vitrinella" seminola more closely resembles the genotype than any other of the Alum Bluff vitrinellids, but it is not glossy. The species is remarkable for the pronounced thickening of the inner margin of the aperture. This character alone will serve to distinguish it from the smaller, more depressed "Vitrinella;" waltonia. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 10609r, 3419 r ; Shoal River formation, locality 3748r.
"Vitrinella" waltonia Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LX, figures 17, 23, 24
Shell minute but solid, subdiscoidal, highly polished. Conch and protoconch not clearly differentiated. Whorls closely appressed, 4 to 4%, well-rounded, increasing regularly in size and with moderate rapidity. Periphery smoothly convex. Posterior margin of whorl creeping up a little on the preceding volution, thus obscuring the sutures at least on the later turns and causing a slight depression in front of the sutures. Surface lustrous, devoid of ornamentation. Aperture rounded, transversely ovate-trigonal, oblique to the axis of the shell. Peristome continuous. Posterior commissure faintly sulcated. Outer lip thin, sharp, sinuous, expanded in front of the commissure, feebly constricted at the periphery and very slightly expanded in front of the periphery. Inner margin of the aperture adnate to the body wall for more than half the distance from the periphery to the umblical keel. Pillar lip excavated and reinforced, most conspicuously so at the umbilical keel and directly behind it. Umbilicus not

very wide but very deep. Carina acute, visible within the pit almost to the apex.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.0 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351626. Type locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. "Vitrinella" waltonia is smaller than "V." seminola, the spire is more depressed, the whorls more rounded and increasing less rapidly in size, and the umbilical keel more acute and visible for a much greater distance within the funnel. A keel such as that developed in "~V." waltonia is probably a superspecific character. "V." blountatia Mansfield, from the Area zone of the Choctawhatchee formation, is smoothly rounded and not carinate basally. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3742r.
"Vitrinella" excavata Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LX, figures 14, 22, 25
Shell minute, rather fragile, depressed, subdiscoidal, of 3 to 3y2 volutions. Apical region somewhat decorticated in the unique type so that the exact number of whorls and the nuclear characters are indeterminate. Apical surface depressed. Basal surface flattened near the periphery, broadly and deeply excavated around the eccentric umbilical pit. Whorls feebly inflated., flattened in front of the suture, and obtusely angulated at the periphery. Sutures creeping up a little against the sides of the preceding volution, causing a shallow depression in front of the sutures. Suture lines obscure. Surface highly polished, incrementally striated. Aperture subtrigonal, feebly sulcated at the posterior commissure, oblique to the axis of the shell. Outer lip thin, sharp, symmetrically expanded between the commissure and the periphery. Peritreme adnate to the body wall from a little behind the periphery almost- halfway across the base of the whorl. Pillar deeply excavated, not reinforced except from the parietal wash. Umbilical funnel very broad, open to the apex, outlined by an obscure keel.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.1 millimeters: maximum, diameter, 3.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351628. Type' locality: No. 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, 5 miles west of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla. "Vitrinella" eoecavata is well characterized by the obtusely angulated periphery and the widely excavated umbilicus. The width of the umbilicus is probably a superspecific character and of sufficient importance to exclude "V" excavata from Vitrinella s.s. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3742r.
Genus CIECUIiTJS Jeffreys
1865. Cireuhts Jeffreys, British Conchology, vol. 3, p. 315.= Adeorbis Searles Wood (part).

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

599

Type by monotypy: DelpMnula duminyi Kequien= AdeorMs striatus Searles Wood, fide Bush, 1897. Recent in European waters.
Very small, circular, nearly flat-spired with an exceedingly wide and open umbilicus. * * *
Operculum circular with about a dozen volutions which wind spirally and gradually, and converge to the centre. Jeffreys, 1863.
In the typical species the apical surface of the shell is decorated with a few sharp evenly spaced spiral lirae.
The confusion more or less prevalent throughout the vitrinellid taxonomy is particularly noticeable among the spirally lirate forms. A knowledge of the animals is essential for a correct classification, and, without this, it is not worth while to attempt to interpret the tangled relationships of Circulus, Adeorbis, and Tornus. Several families may be represented in the shells that have been assigned to these genera.
"Circulus" mitorraphes Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXI, figures 1, 2, 27
Shell minute, depressed, subdiscoidal. Whorls possibly 4, the apex slightly decorticated, so that the exact number is not determinable and the nuclear characters are lost. Conch a little more than twice coiled, evenly inflated except for a shallow depression in front of the suture line on the later volutions. Sculpture initiated l)y the posterior spiral, followed almost immediately by the anterior and later by the medial, becoming within an eighth of a turn equal and equispaced and symmetrically disposed on the whorl; number of spirals increased by the introduction of additional spirals at the anterior suture. Body whorl of type sculptured behind the periphery with 7 sharply elevated lirae, subequal in size and spacing; intercalaries introduced near the aperture; depressed area in front of the suture threaded with 2 to 4 crowded threadlets; rounded periphery outlined by a liration slightly more elevated than those either in front of or behind it; 7 primary lirae in front of the periphery; secondaries intercalated near the aperture; 5 finer additional lirae regularly disposed within the umbilical funnel. Umbilicus large and open, the reverse of the spire, perforate to the apex. Aperture subcircular. Peritreme continuous, closely adnate to the body wall, reverted slightly in the umbilical area.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.4 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350505. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow Kiver, Okaloosa County, Fla. "Circulus" mitorraphes is the Oak Grove and Shoal Kiver member of the large and very closely allied group represented on the one hand by Circulus supra-nitidus (Searles Wood) and on the other by "Circulus" costuIdtus (H. C. Lea). "C." mitorraphes most closely resembles "C." d'orbignyi (Fischer) and "C." liratus

Bush, but it differs from both in the uniform and more numerous lirations on the main body of the whorl and the development of a finer threading in the depressed area in front of the suture and in the umbilical pit.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646r, 5632r ; Shoal Kiver formation, locality 3742r.
"Circulus" anthera Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXI, figures 3, 6, 18, 22, 26, 28
Shell minute, subdiscoidal. Nucleus relatively large, smooth, apparently of 3 turns, the whorls erect and increasing in size with uniform rapidity. Whorls of conch apparently only 2, more rapidly increasing in size than those of the protoconch, closely appressed, bicarinate at the periphery, flattened or broadly concave in front of the suture in the adult, horizontally tabulated in the young, flattened on the base. Spiral sculpture abruptly initiated at the beginning of the conch, the spirals increasing in number by intercalations at the suture line; primaries 7 or 8 in number behind the periphery of the adult, including the slightly more elevated thread that outlines and emphasizes the posterior keel. Shoulder depression broadly and evenly concave, occupying a little less than half the space between the suture and the periphery; threaded with 4 to 7 subequal secondaries. Space between the anterior and posterior keels flattened, only a little narrower than the sculptured portion of the base; threaded with 6 or 7 microscopically fine lirae. Sutures inconspicuous, creeping up a little on the preceding whorl. Base flattened in front of the posterior carina, smooth or obscurely striate except on the final half turn, where it is sculptured with 6 or 7 equal and equispaced primaries, the posterior of which outlines the peripheral, the anterior the umbilical keel. Funnel broad and deep, persistent to the apex; smooth or finely lirate. Aperture subcircular or rounded-trigonal, oblique to the axis of the shell, obtusely angulated at the carinae. Peristome continuous, adnate to the body wall from a point a little behind the posterior keel to one a little in front of the anterior carina. Outer lip expanded. Inner lip excavated but not thickened.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.8 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 1.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 2.6 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351632. Paratype, U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498022.
Type locality: 3742, Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.
"Circulus" anthera is closely allied to "C" mitorraphes, and it may be possible, with the aid of further material to establish a connecting series. The former species suggests a "C." mitorraphes that has developed double peripheral keels, separated by a rather wide, flattened area; a flattened base, and a broad tabula-

600 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

tion or - depression in front of the shoulder. It also suggests a "Circulus" trilix in which the sculpture 011 the apical surface is obsolete except for the primaries that outline the carinae.
The adolescent forms are so distinct that they were at first mistaken for another race. They are similar to "C" trilix but are spirally threaded in front of the shoulder of the final whorl of the spire and have a second sharply elevated spiral revolving directly in front of that which outlines the shoulder.
Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 5632P, 7054r ; Shoal River formation, locality 3742P.
"Circulus" trilix Bush
1885. Skenea trilix Bush, U. S. Fish Commission, Rept. for 1883, p. 584 [82].
1885. Skenea trilix Bush, Connecticut Acad. Arts and Sci. Trans., vol. 6, p. 464.
1889. Adeorbis supranitidus Wood. Ball, Harvard Coll. Mus., Comp. Zoology Bull., vol. 18, p. 278 (part).
Not- Adeorbis supranitidus Searles Wood, Annals and Mag. Nat. History, vol. 9, p. 530, 1842.
1889. Adeorbis supranitidus Wood. Ball, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. no. 37, p. 150, pi. 41, figs. 7-7a.
1897. Girculus trilix Bush, Connecticut Acad. Arts and Sci. Trans., vol. 10, p. 127.
This species closely resembles Adeorbis supranitida Wood in form and sculpture, but it has a thin, horny operculum and an animal like Skenea. Bush, 1885, p. 584.
Shell small, disk-shaped, with the spire nearly flat, but with the nuclear whorls rising a little above the level of the last whorl. Whorls four or more, the body whorl strongly tricarinate, one carina at the periphery, one around the base, and one around the shoulder, the spaces between them equal, convex and nearly smooth. The upper carina shows on all except the nuclear whorls and the one next following; above this carina the whorl is flattened or slightly concave, joining the preceding whorl nearly at right angles, but swelling a little close to the suture; on this band four or five faint spiral striae sometimes occur; more rarely traces of them are found below the carina and on the base. On the basal side, the last whorl is pretty regularly rounded and strongly convex and the umbilical depression is large and deep, funnel-shaped, extending to the apex. Within this, the whorls are distinctly spirally grooved and sometimes its border is defined by a small, distinctly raised carina. Aperture nearly circular though slightly angulated at the carinae. Lip a little thickened, slightly expanded next the body whorl; inner lip represented only by a thin, closely adherent layer of enamel. Nucleus small, a little prominent, smooth, glossy and subvitreous, the apical whorl minute and slightly turned up. Surface of the shell lustrous and usually nearly smooth, though often showing faint, fiexuous lines of growth * * * .
Very abundant, both alive and dead, in 7 to 17 fathoms. Bush, 1885, p. 464.
Through the courtesy of Mr. Ball, I have been able to study two authentic specimens of supranitidus from the Crag, in the U. S. National Museum.
They are about half the size of a full-grown trilix and differ from specimens of that species of the same si?e in lacking the distinct tricarination of the whorls, in having the whorls more convex and more regularly coiled, so that the body whorl is not so abruptly enlarged, in having the spire relatively larger,

and in the striation of the umbilicus. Both specimens of supranitidus have three conspicuous revolving threads separated by deep grooves in the umbilicus; one has a very prominent basal carina, the other has it but partially developed; in this specimen the whorls are perfectly smooth, while in the former the two faint upper carinae commence just back of the aperture; neither show any trace of the microscopic striations found in trilix. In the many specimens of the latter which I have, there seems to be no variation in the size of the small nucleus, the relatively much smaller spire and abruptly enlarged body whorl (a peculiarity which becomes more marked as the shell increases) and in the strong tricarination of the whorls, even in very small specimens. They differ only in the number and prominence of the threads in the umbilical region, and in the distinctness of the microscopic striations on the upper part of the whorls. The constancy of these characters ought to prove that the two species are quite distinct. Bush, 1897.
It is of especial interest to be able to correlate a fossil species with a Recent form on which accurate bathymetric observations have been made.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213C ; Shoal River formation, localities 5079r, 5618r.
Genus COCHLIOLEPIS Stimpson
18."i8. Cochliolepis Stimpson, Boston Soc. Nat. History Proc.,. vol. 6, p. 307.
Type by monotypy: Cochliolepis parasitica Stimpson. Recent in Charleston harbor and the Florida Keys. Parasitic on the annelid Acoetes lupiwus Stimpson.
Shell minute, thin, fragile, depressed, nautiliform, paucispiral. Surface smooth in the genotype; spirally lirate in other species. Aperture holostomous. Peristome thin, sharp, interrupted at the body wall. Umbilicus the reverse of the spire.
A number of these small forms have been reported from the Tertiary beds and from the waters of the Recent seas.
The only species represented in the Alum Bluff group is restricted in its distribution to a single locality in the Oak Grove sand.
Cochliolepis arietina Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXI, figures 23-25
Shell minute, depressed, nautiliform, the body whorl rather inflated for the genus, smoothly rounded at the periphery. Apical surface flattened to feebly convex. Basal surface well rounded. Nucleus asymmetric in its position on the apical surface; minute, erect; the 2 to 3 whorls smooth, partially submerged, increasing regularly and not very rapidly. Conch twice-coiled, increasing rapidly in diameter, the later turn enveloping and largely concealing the earlier. Apical surface lineated with exceedingly fine Swim-like spiral threadlets, finest and most crowded toward the periphery. Spirals on the basal surface also finest and most crowded toward the periphery, becoming less fine and more irregular toward the umbilical pit. Incremental striae

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

601

irregular in size and spacing. Suture lines distinct, slightly impressed. Aperture obliquely lobate, the outer margin thin and sharp; somewhat compressed at the periphery. Peristome interrupted, adnate to the body wall for a greater distance behin4 the periphery than in front of it. Inner lip a trifle heavier than the outer. Umbilicus the reverse of the spire, open to the apex; microscopically lirate.
Dimensions of holotype: Height 13 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.2 millimeters.
Holotype: U. g. Nat. Mus. No. 136081. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. Cochliolepis arietina resembles C. striata of the Neocene and Recent faunas. Its height, however, is relatively greater than that of the later species, and it is less compressed both on the apical and basal surfaces, with a consequently broader periphery. Several individuals have been found at the type locality, but it has not been recognized elsewhere. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, locality 2646p .
Genus EPISCTTNIA Mdrch
1875. Episcynia Morch, Synopsis Molluscorum rnarinorurn Indiarum occidentalium: Malakozoologische Blatter, vol. 22, p. 155.
Type by monotypy: Architectonica (Episcynia) inornata (D'Orbigny)=$otoriwm inornatum D'Orbigny. Recent off St. Thomas, Virgin Islands.
Shell hyaline, small, fragile, smooth, or nearly so; depressed-conic. Whorls rather numerous, regularly increasing in size, moderately convex, strongly carinate. Aperture entire, its transverse axis nearly in line with the horizontal axis of the shell. Peritreme continuous, adnate to the body wall between the peripheral and umbilical carinae. Umbilicus small but deep and regular in outline, the ascending spiral of the umbilical keel traceable within.
The presence of a heavy epidermis, according to Miss Bush,39 excludes this genus from the Vitrinellidae.
Episcynia has not been recorded from pre-Tertiary strata. The Recent species are, for the most part, tropical and subtropical in distribution.
Episcynia mauryi Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXI, figures 4, 5, 7
1910. Adeorbis aldriclii Maury?, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 29, pi. 7, fig. 7.
Shell small, very thin and highly polished; depressedturbinate on the apical surface, flattened on the base. Whorls approximately 5, including the 2 planorboid nuclear coils, which are rather inflated and open rather rapidly from the immersed tip. Whorls of conch very
39 Bush, K. J., Revision of the marine gastropods referred to Cyclostrema, AdeorWs, Vitrinella, and related genera; with descriptions of some new genera and species belonging to the Atlantic fauna of America : Connecticut Acad. Trails., vol. 10, pp. 107, 112, 1897.

broadly convex, increasing slowly and regularly in size, sharply carinate at the periphery, which is concealed on all but the body whorl. Surface smooth except for incrementals retractive behind the periphery, least feeble near the aperture; and for the spiral thread that outlines the acutely angulated periphery and is demarcated on either side by an incised line. Sutures distinct, impressed, coincident with the periphery of the preceding volution. Base feebly convex. Aperture holostomous, transversely elliptical, the axis nearly in line with the horizontal axis of the shell; obtusely angulated at the periphery, which is symmetrically placed at one end of the ellipse. Peristome continuous, adnate to the body wall for approximately two-thirds the distance from the peripheral to the umbilical keel. Umbilical perforation small but persistent to the apex; regular in outline, central in position, very finely threaded spirally and revealing within, the carinae of the successive volutions. Outer margin of pit acutely angulated.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 2.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.4 millimeters.
-Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350510. Type locality: No. 5632, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. The Alum Bluff species differs from the later Tertiary and Recent forms, to which it is very closely allied, in the slightly higher relative outline and more numerous whorls and in the absence of any trace of secondary carinae such as the two that are developed in Episcynia multicarinata, one in front of and the other behind the periphery. In E. naso (Pilsbry and Johnson) the whorls are more inflated behind the periphery, and the peripheral cord is finely crenulated. The species is restricted to the Oak Grove sand, but it is fairly well represented at that single horizon. Miss Maury's Adeorbis aldrichi seems to be a larval form and identical with the protoconch of this species. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 2646C, 5632», 5633r, 7054r, Cornell University collection.

1821. 1828.
1920.

Syncera Gray, London Medical Repository, vol. 15, p. 239. Assiminea W. E. Leach, in Fleming. History of British
Animals, p. 275. Syncera Bartsch, U. S. Nat. Mus. Proc., vol. 58, p. 163.

Type by monotypy: Nerita Syncera hepatica Gray. Estuarine in the south of England.
The type species was described from the animal that "differs from all the others of this order, by the eyes appearing to be at the ends of the tentacula; but I believe," wrote the astute Doctor Gray "that they are placed on a peduncle, as long as the tentacula, and the peduncle and tentacula are soldered together."
The name Syncera,, signifying without a horn, probably refers to the fusion of the tentacles.

602 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Gray considered Syncera as a subgroup of Nerita, In a heavy glaze that washes the parietal wall and rein-

explanation of the arrangement which he used, he wrote forces the pillar. Anterior extremity of aperture ob-

as follows:

scurely emarginate. Umbilical chink narrow, crescen-

The genera that are here given mostly contain many subgenera, and are what are called by several modern naturalists natural families: but I prefer to call them genera and their subdivisions subgenera, because then either name can be used separately and so suits both opinions; for the genera may be made into families by changing the termination, as from Umax to limacidae, and because I think that it is easier to recollect Umax arion hortensis, than arion hortensis alone, as genera are now become so numerous [year 1821] that naturalists really want something to let them know to what part of natural history they belong.

tic, bounded by an obtuse carina. Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.0 millimeters;
maximum diameter, 1.5 millimeters. Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329042. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry,
Calhoun County, Fla. This species has been confused with Assiminea af-
finis (D'Orbigny), a smaller shell in which the whorls are feebly constricted at the sutures, the periphery rounded instead of angulated, and the umbilicus en-

Shell minute, turbinate or biconic. Whorls feebly or not at all convex. Surface usually smooth except for incrementals. Aperture holostomous, obliquely ovate or

tirely concealed. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 22121',
2213a, 2564P, 3419?, 2211?.

elliptical, angulated posteriorly, broadly and smoothly rounded anteriorly. Outer lip thin, sharp, simple. Inner lip formed by a heavy glaze that washes the parietal wall and reinforces the pillar. Umbilicus closed or narrowly crescentic; the umbilical keel, if present, subacute or narrowly obtuse.

Family RISSOINIDAE Genus RISSOINA D'Orbigny
1840. Rissoina D'Orbigny, Voyage dans 1'Amerique meridionale, vol. 5, pt. 3 (Mollusques), p. 395.
1928. Rissoina D'Orbigny. Woodring, Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2; Carnegie Inst. Washington

The Recent species have a wide distribution in the estuarine and littoral zones of the warm and temperate waters.

Pub. 385, p. 362. An exhaustive treatment of the Bowden Rissoina fauna with particular emphasis on the superspecific groups.

Type by monotypy: Rissoina inca d'Orbigny. Kecent

Syncera microgaza Gardner, n. sp.

off the west coast of South America from Peru to the

Plate LVII, figure 9

Island of Chiloe (Chile). Shell minute, elongate-turbinate. Whorls numerous,

1892. Assiminea tiffin is Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 347 (partim).
Not Paludestrina affinis D'Orbigny, 1842.

tapering gradually to the mamillar apex. Surface axially or spirally ribbed or cancellated, rarely smooth. Aperture semielliptical. Outer lip protractive, thick-

Shell a rather slender little cone tapering to an acute ened, slightly reflected, effuse, or faintly channeled

apex at a uniform angle of approximately 40°. Pe- anteriorly. Columella nonplicate. Operculum thick,

riphery of body whorl obtusely keeled. Base obliquely horny, semilunar, paucispiral, bearing a claviform

rounded. Protoconch very small and blunt, of 1% process on the internal face.

volutions; the initial half turn almost entirely im- The form of the operculum, the sinuous outer lip,

mersed, the succeeding whorl moderately inflated. and the depression of the anterior portion of the aper-

Whorls of conch 4%, flattened laterally, the profile ture are distinguishing features of the genus. Like the

scarcely interrupted at the sutures. Surface smooth, closely related Rissoa, which is usually more squat

opaque. Sutures distinct, impressed, coincident with with a vertical instead of a protractive outer lip, Ris-

the periphery except at the aperture, where the line soina frequents the shallower waters, where the vege-

drops a little in front of the keel. Aperture obliquely tation is abundant.

lenticular, sharply angulated - at the posterior com- The restriction of the genus to the Chipola forma-

missure. Outer lip rather strongly arcuate, feebly ex- tion must be due rather to the accidents of collecting

panded in front. Inner margin of aperture formed by than to the original distribution.

External surface axially costate or feebly cancellated. Aperture slit at anal fascicle; siphonal fascicle clearly defined and bulging. . .Rissoina (Mirarissoina)juncea Gardner, n. sp. Aperture not slit at anal fascicle; siphonal fasciole not clearly defined nor bulging: Axials exceeding 25 in number. .......................................... .Rissoina (Zebinella) decussata (Montagu) Axials not exceeding 25 in number............................................... Rissoina (ZeMnella) chipolana Dall
External surface spirally costate........................................................... Rissoina vittata Gardner, n. sp.
External surface smooth. ..................................................... .Rissoina (Cibdesebina) browniana D'Orbigny

CTBNOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

603

Subgenus MIRABISSOINA Woodring
1928. Mirans'soina Woodring, Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2; Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 365.

and the anterior fasciole decidedly more swollen. The varicose outer lip indicates the maturity of the unique type.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.

Type by original designation: Rissoina (Mirarissoina) lepida Woodring. Miocene of Bowden, Jamaica.
Shell small, or medium-sized, slender. Nucleus consisting of between two and a half and three and a half smooth whorls. Outer lip varicose, strongly extended forward, bearing at suture n strongly constricted, narrow anal notch. Anterior channel broad and shallow. Siphonal fascicle narrow, low or high. Sculpture generally consisting of fine protractive axial ribs and finer spiral threads.
The distinct anal notch and broad anterior channel are distinctive of Mirarissoina. The outer lip and sculpture are like that of other subgenera of Rissoina, but so far as I know no other fossil or living shells have such a characteristic Rissoina shape and outer lip, and so distinct an anal notch. Woodring, 1928.
Rissoina (Mirarissoina) juncea Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figure 34
Shell small for the genus and very slender. Volutions 8 including the 3 whorled protoconch. Initial turn rather inflated and immersed at the tip; succeeding turns of protoconch flattened laterally, rather elevated and separated by impressed sutures. Beginning of conch marked by the loss of the high luster and the initiation of the sculpture. Whorls of conch closely appressed, feebly constricted at the sutures, increasing very gradually in size; body whorl broadly and smoothly rounded toward the base. Surface delicately but rather elaborately sculptured. Axials low and rounded, approximately 40 on the later whorls, uniform in strength between the sutures but weakening near the base of the body and on the final half turn, protractive and performing approximately a quarter of a revolution around the axis. Surface from apex to canal threaded with exceedingly fine spiral lirae, restricted, to the intercostal areas and least feeble toward the base. Aperture lobate, acutely angulated and slit posteriorly. Outer lip effuse anteriorly, varicose, the spiral sculpture persistent across the varix; inner margin smooth and simple. Labium oblique, nonplicate, smoothly glazed from the posterior commissure to the slight thickening at the base of the pillar. Anterior extremity feebly emarginate. Umbilicus closed; surface narrowly depressed, however, behind the pillar, the depression limited posteriorly by a low well-defined siphonal fasciole.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.1 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.2 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329041. Type locality: No. 2213, \ mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Rissoina juncea resembles the Bowden subgenotype, but the axial sculpture of the Chipola species is finer

Subgenus ZEBINELLA Morch
1876. Zebinella Mb'rch, Malakozoologische Blatter, vol. 23, p. 47.
Type by subsequent designation (Nevill, Hand list of Mollusca of Indian Museum, pt. 2, pp. 73, 87, 1885) : Rissoina decussata ( Montagu )=Heli(v decussata Montagu. Recent from North Carolina to the Gulf of Mexico and the West Indies.
The shell is moderately small and slender. The 2y2 to 3 nuclear whorls are small, smooth, and shining. The whorls of the conch are moderately high and feebly constricted at the sutures, the body smoothly produced. The axials are numerous and blunt; the spirals numerous, very fine and sharp, and strongest on the anterior portion of the body, where the axials are commonly obsolete. The aperture is obliquely lobate, angulated and channeled at the posterior commissure. The outer lip is thickened a little behind the margin, thin at the margin, dropping almost vertically from the commissure, expanded forward to form a sort of a scoop. The inner apertural margin is oblique and heavily glazed, the reverted wash completely concealing the umbilical chink. The margins of the aperture are depressed forward to form an incipient channel.
The subgenus is prolific and widely distributed in the later Tertiary and Recent faunas of the midAmericas.
Rissoina (Zebinella) decussata (Montagu)
1803. Helix decussata Montagu, Testacea Brittanica, p. 399, pi. 15, fig. 7.
?1850. Rissoa striosa C. B. Adams, Contributions to conchology, p. 116.
?1852. Rissoa Janus C. B. Adams, Catalogue of shells collected at Panama, p. 179; Lyceum Nat. History, New York Ann., vol. 5, p. 538.
1853. Rissoa decussata (Montagu). Forbes and Hanley, History of British Mollusca, vol. 3, p. 147.
1860. Rissoina decussata (Montagu). Schwartz von Mohrenstern, Akad. Wiss. Wien, Math-Naturwiss. Kl., Denkschr., p. 80, [148], pi. 6, figs. 44, 44a.
1892. Rissoina decussata (Montagu). Ball, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 343 (partim?).
H[elix]. with a slender white shell, with eight or nine spires tapering to a fine point; volutions very little raised and the separating line extremely fine; these are strongly and regularly striated in a longitudinal direction crossed by very minute striae that gives it a slight decussated appearance when examined by a lens; aperture narrow, suboval, contracted at both ends; outer lip somewhat expanded and a little thickened at the back; inner lip a trifle replicated. Length three-tenths of an inch ; breadth one-tenth. Montagu, 1803.
Type locality: Southern coast of England between Weymouth and Portland Island, possibly introduced.

695462 47 8

604 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

The species in the Chipola formation allied to Rissoina decussata (Montagu) is the largest and stoutest of any member of the genus within the Alum Bluff. The young, as is usual with the group, are stouter than the adults and rather sharply angulated at the periphery of the body. The axial costae number, as a rule, from 30 to 40, although there may be as many as 60. Concomitant with the increase in the number of the ribs is a decrease in their elevation and an increase both relative and absolute in the strength of the microscopically fine spiral threading that covers the shell from the apex to the canal.
Although forms that cling to seaweed are much more widely distributed than bottom forms, it is highly probable that the limits of distribution of the species have been made entirely too wide and that the American form first described by D'Orbigny from Cuba under the name R. striato-costata is at least subspecifically distinct from the European race. The American form is apparently somewhat larger and perceptibly stouter, more finely sculptured axially and less finely spirally. Both types of sculpture pattern seem to be represented at a single locality in the Chipola formation; the finely costate is much more abundant, however. The relationship of the two forms can be determined only with the aid of a suite of Recent material from both the American and the European shores.
Rissoina, decussata has been reported from the late Tertiaries of southern Europe, and records of it in the Recent faunas are almost world wide. Jeffreys, 1867, does not, however, recognize the species in the European faunas, and Forbes and Hanley, 1853, regard it as an introduced West Indian species and the reports of it from other waters as spurious.
The American race ranges from Cape Fear to the Gulf of Mexico and through the West Indies in 2 to 17 fathoms.
Occurrence of Rissoina sp. cf. R. decussata (Montagu) : Chipola formation, locality 2213C.
Rissoina (Zebinella) chipolana Dall
Plate LVII, figure 35
1892. Rissoina chipolana Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 343, pi. 22, fig. 20.
Shell slender, acute, with a minute nucleus of two and a half smooth whorls, followed by seven subsequent whorls; whorls slightly rounded, suture appressed: transverse sculpture of sixteen to twenty narrow, rounded, slightly flexuous ribs, usually with about equal interspaces, which completely cross the whorls; spiral sculpture of fine striae, generally confined to the base of the shell, but sometimes extending over the whole surface; aperture semicircular; lip thickened and varicose, produced at the middle, receding at the base of the pillar and at the posterior commissure, basal fasciole obscure, slightly tumid, interior of aperture smooth and simple. Lon. of shell 6; max. diam. 2.5 mm.
The average size is smaller than that above given. The nearest species to this is the R. triangularis Watson, a recent

Australian species. The R. mississippiensis Meyer has some characters in common, but is smaller and has a much blunter apex; on the whole, this is a very distinct species. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113582. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. The compound microscope reveals the spiral threading over the entire shell of the holotype, although it is least feeble at the base. In fresher specimens from a nearby locality, fine but very sharp threadlets, usually 11 or 12 to the whorl, override the axials. The relative dimensions vary, so that the peripheral members have a very different aspect from, the type. The young are relatively stouter than the adults and obtusely angulated at the periphery. The parietal wall is heavily calloused, and the inner lip reverted and slightly thickened at the base of the pillar. The umbilicus is entirely concealed. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213C, 2564a, 3419a, 2211C.
Subgenus CIBDEZEBINA Woodxing
1928. Cibdezebina Woodring, Miocene mollusks from Bowden. Jamaica, pt. 2; Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 369.
Type by original designation: Rissoina, browniana d'Orbigny. Recent in the West Indies.
Shell very small, relatively stout, perfectly smooth, whorls of spire almost flat. Nucleus consisting of about two and a half whorls. Outer lip varicose, extending forward. Anterior channel broad and shallow. Interior of outer lip bearing a denticle near its posterior end, basal lip bearing a similar denticle. Siphonal fasciole weakly inflated. Woodring, 1928.
The description is based on the subgenotype. The development of the denticles seems to be an inconstant character both in the Recent and in the fossil individuals.
Rissoina (Cibdezebina) browniana D'Orbigny
71845. Rissoina browniana d'Orbigny, in De la Sagra, Historia, fisica politica y natural de la Isla de Cuba, pt. 2, (Historia natural), vol. 5 (Moluscas), p. 164, pi. 12, figs. 33-35. French ed., pt. 2, (Mollusques), vol. 2, p. 28, 1853.
1850. Rissoa laeviffata C. B. Adams, Contributions to conchology, p. 114.
1860. Rissoina browniana D'Orbigny. Schwartz von Mohrenstern, Akad. Wiss. Wien, Math.-naturwiss. Kl., Denkschr., vol. 19, pt. 2, p. 178, pi, 10, fig. 78.
1860. Rissoina Jaevigata C. B. Adams. Schwartz von Mohrenstern, idem, p. 179, fig. 79.
1873. (February). lopsis fusiformis Gabb, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, Proc. for 1872, p. 272, pi. 11, fig, 6.
1873. lopsis fusiformis Gabb, Am. Philos. Soc. Trans., n. ser., vol. 15, p. 228.
1873. Evdima crassilabris Gabb, idem, p. 227. Not Eulima crassilabris Gabb, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Jour., ser. 2, vol. 8, p. 358, pi. 46, fig. 43, 1881.
1887. Rissohia broirniana D'Orbigny. Tryon. Manual of Conchology, vol. 9, p. 390, pi. 59, figs. 45, ?46.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

605

1892. Rissoina laevigata (C. B. Adams). Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trails., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 342.
1896. Rissoina broicniana D'Orbigny. Guppy and Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Proc., vol. 19, p. 322 (partim).
1917. Rissoina crassilabris Gabb. Maury. Bull. Am. Paleon-
tology, vol. o, no. 29, p. 132, pi. 21, fig. 19. 1922. Rissoina (ZeMnst) laevigata (C. B. Adams). Pilsbry,
Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 73, p. 382, pi. 34, figs. 3, 4, text fig. 19. 1928. Rissoina (Cibdesebina) 'brown-iana D'Orbigny. Wood-
ring, Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2, Carnegie Inst. Washington, Pub. 385. p. 370, pi. 29, fig. 6.
1937. Rissoina laevigata C. B. Adams. Maxwell Smith, East
coast marine shells, p. 97, pi. 33, fig. 6; pi. 37, fig. 16a.
D'Orbigny in his original description reported the species to be common at St. Thomas and rare off Martinique and Haiti.
The Tertiary individuals run a little smaller and a little stouter than the Eecent, but these unadorned shells, which change their outline with their age and offer a moderately wide range in age variation, can not be separated on the basis of outline alone with any degree of satisfaction. Not all of the Alum Bluff individuals exhibit the inflation of the nuclear whorls that characterizes the species, but some of them do and it is futile to attempt a specific separation on that character. The shells are slender little cones, including as many as 9 whorls in all. The winding is close and tight, the whorls laterally compressed, and the sutures linear. Near the aperture the outer lip creeps backward a little. The aperture is obliquely lobate, angulated posteriorly and feebly channeled; smoothly rounded anteriorly. The outer lip is feebly protractive, thickened, expanded forward and commonly bearing a denticle on the inner margin not far from the commissure. The glaze on the parietal wall is evenly spread and reverted along the pillar, completely concealing the umbilicus. An average specimen measures 4.6 millimeters in height and 1.8 millimeters in diameter.
Mansfield's R. tersa from the Ccmcellaria zone of the Choctawhatchee formation is apparently adult, but it includes only 5% whorls in all. Mansfield noted that the Eecent species "has a more attenuated upper spire and more numerous, more loosely coiled and smaller nuclear whorls." He included under it the specimens from the Duplin formation at Natural Well, N. C.
Rissoina broivniana may be susceptible to further division. But some at least of the Alum Bluff individuals can not properly be separated from the Eecent forms, which they resemble more closely than they do the Choctawhatchee individuals.
The young forms are stouter relatively than the adults and are inclined to be obtusely angulated instead of smoothly rounded at the periphery of the body. The whorls are closely appressed and sometimes a little constricted at the sutures in the later whorls of mature individuals.

Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213a, 2564r, 2211P.
Outside occurrence: Cercado and Gurabo formations of the Dominican Eepublic. Bowden Beds of Jamaica. Caloosahatchee marl of Florida. Eecent from Cape Lookout to the Gulf of Mexico and St. Thomas to a depth of 22 fathoms.
Rissoina vittata Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figure 33
Shell small, solid, moderately slender. Whorls approximately 6. Apex somewhat decorticated and nuclear characters partially lost; protoconch probably not more than twice coiled. Whorls flattened laterally, their outline obscured by the sculpture; regularly and rather slowly increasing in size; body whorl smoothly rounded at the base. No axial sculpture except faint, flexuous incrementals. Spiral sculpture initiated by a single, strong band originally medial but on the later whorls slightly anterior and very prominent; surface directly in front of the suture line raised, thus simulating a posterior spiral; suture following a third cord which, however, is concealed on all but the final volution; two additional spirals lesg elevated than those behind them developed on the base of the body; area between the spirals somewhat concave. Suture lines indistinct, obscured by the posterior spiral. Aperture obliquely lobate, angulated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip varicose, effuse and slightly reverted anteriorly, smooth and simple within; body sculpture continuous across the varix. Inner lip oblique, very feebly excavated. Parietal wash rather thin, calloused, perceptibly thickening at the base of the pillar. Anterior extremity slightly depressed, suggesting an incipient canal.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114359. Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed Alum Bluff, Calhoun County, Fla. The type is unique in the east-coast faunas both in number and in character of sculpture. It seems improbable that the likeness in sculpture pattern to members of the subgenus Iravadia Blanford40 should be indicative of a fundamentally close kinship. Iravadia ornata Blanford, the type of the group, is a brackish-water form, described from the Irawady Delta, and the entire group is restricted in its published distribution to the China Sea and the Indian Ocean. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211r.
40 Blanford, W. T., List of estuary shells collected in the delta of the Irawady, in Pegu [India], with descriptions of the new species, in Contributions to Indian Malacology, No. 8 : Asiastic Soc. Bengal Jour., vol. 36, pt. 2, p. 56, 1867.

606 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Family RISSOIDAE Genus RISSOA Fr6minville
1813. Rissoa Freminville in Risso, Nouveau Bull. Sci. par la Soci6te philomatique de Paris, vol. 3. 5th year, pp. 340, 341.
1814. Rissoa Frgminville, Demarest, Nouveau Bull. Sci. par la Socie"te phPomatique de Paris, vol. 4, p. 7.
Type by subsequent designation (Bucquoy, Dautzenberg and Dollfus, Mollusques marins du Rousillon, vol. 1, p. 262, 1884) : Rissoa ventricosa Demarest. Reported from the Pliocene and Pleistocene of northern Italy. Recent in the Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas.
Freminville, in 1813, discussed a collection he had made near Mce and mentioned a new genus allied to Turbo, which he proposed to name in honor of the French naturalist Risso. He gave a list of 8 species, all of them undescribed, so that Rissoa Frdminville, 1813, was a genus without species. Demarest, in 1814, described the species listed by Freminville in 1813. Type designations were made by Anton, 1830, and Woodward, 1851 and 1870, but in no case was the species designated included in the first list.
Shell small, imperforate or subperforate, usually heavy, oblong-turbinate. Surface smooth, axially ribbed or cancellated, more rarely spirally sculptured. Aperture entire, oval. Peristome thick, continuous, simple or reflected. Labrum simple or varicose. Operculum thin, horny, paucispiral.
The large group of Recent forms has a wide geographic distribution; they are, for the most part, phytophagous, and abound in the inshore waters on beds of seaweed.
Axial sculpture dominating the spiral Rissoa phagon Gardner, n. sp.
Axial sculpture reduced to feeble incrementals . Rissoa litiopaopsis Gardner, n. sp.
Rissoa phagon Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVI1, figure 10
Shell minute, squat-conic, coiled between 4% and 5 times. Protoconch smooth, rather dull, not sharply differentiated from the conch, composed of approximately 214 turns; initial half turn partially immersed; succeeding volution convex, becoming increasingly elevated; final nuclear turn broadly convex and tending to be obscurely shouldered. Sculpture initiated by exceedingly fine axial riblets, the first two or three restricted to the medial and anterior portions of the whorl, the succeeding riblets persistent to the posterior suture but more feeble behind; final whorl of spire ornamented with 24 or 25 narrow, sharply rounded axial riblets separated by shallow interaxials of approximately the same width. Spiral sculpture initiated near the middle of the first whorl of conch by a faint liration at the shoulder and another at the periphery; a couple of intermediate spirals introduced

before the end of the whorl; axials on the body reduced to 17 but more elevated and separated by more broadly concave interspaces than those on the preceding turn; spiral lirae 8, very fine, absent on the posterior fourth, very faint medially, less feeble anteriorly. Suture line impressed, dropping a little in front of the periphery on the last two turns, so that it is somewhat overhung by the preceding volution. Aperture holostomous, obliquely ovate. Outer lip varicose but rather thin at the margin, smooth within, effuse anteriorly and slightly patulous. Peristome continuous, the lining of the inner lip heavily glazing the parietal wall and reinforcing the columella. Umbilical chink narrowly crescentic, very shallow.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.25 millimeters; diameter, 0.9 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136051. Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla. Rissoa phagon is more squat than Rissoa lipeus Dall from the Caloosahatchee and the subspecies R. lipeus floridana Mansfield from the Choctawhatchee. In R. lipeus and its subspecies the axials are thin and sharp and form with the spirals an evenly cancellate sculpture, but in R. phagon the axials are blunt and relatively broad. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, locality 2646r.
Section ONOBA H. and A. Adams
1854. Onoba H. and A. Adams. Genera Recent Mollusca, vol. 1, p. 331.
Type by subsequent designation (Nevill, Hand List Mollusca Indian Museum, pt. 2, p. 119, 1885) : Turlo striatus, John Adams. Recent along the European shores from Norway to the Mediterranean; fossil in the Crag.
Operculum ovate, simple, subspiral. Shell elongated, whorls numerous, rounded, spirally striated; aperture oval, entire in front, peritreme continuous, thickened, straight or slightly everted. Syn. Turbonilla Leach, not Risso. Ex. 0. striata Montagu, pi. 35, fig. 4. This genus includes a small group of elegantly formed shells, more or less partaking of the characters of Rissoa, but their whorls are not longitudinally ribbed, and the peritreme is not dilated. H. and A. Adams, 1854.
It is doubtful if Onoba merits even sectional rank. A variety of the type species of the section is axially puckered in front of the suture line, and it was apparently this variant which Montagu had in mind when he discussed 0. striata which he credited to John Adams.41 The John Adams specimens are apparently printed backward and so resemble Physa rather than
41 Adams, John, The specific characters of some minute shells discovered' on the coast of Pembrokeshire, with an account of a new marine animal: Linnean Soc. London Trans., p. 66, pi. 13, figs. 25, 26, 1797.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

607

the rissoids. The description given by Adams is in Latin and covers two lines, in which mention is made of five whorls spirally striated, an oval aperture, white color, and an uncommonly elegant shell. No measurements are given.
If the 0. striata of John Adams and of Montagu should later be shown to be distinct, Nevill's type designation will no longer be valid, for only 0. striata Montagu is included in the original list of Onoba. The thickening of the outer lip, like the incipient axial sculpture, seems to be an inconstant character even within the species. In so large and cumbersome a group, the section may perhaps be retained for rissoids in which the axial ribbing is absent or fortuitous, the aperture little or not at all expanded, and the outer lip little or not at all varicose.
Rissoa litiopaopsis Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LVII, figures 19, 24
Shell minute, compact, ovate. Whorls very closely appressed, increasing regularly and not very rapidly in size; 6 including the 3 minute nuclear volutions. Initial half turn highly inflated and immersed at its origin, thus simulating a slight apical tilt, the succeeding volution of the protoconch less inflated and gradually assuming the feebly convex, buccinoid outline of the whorls of the conch; body whorl smoothly constricted at the base. Line of demarcation between conch and protoconch obscure, marked only by the gradual initiation of the feeble sculpture. Entire surface of conch spirally grooved with narrow and very, shallow sulci separated by flattened interspiral areas, 12 or 13 on the final whorl of the spire and approximately 25 on the body, subequal in size and spacing except for the sulcus directly anterior to the suture, which is slightly wider and slightly deeper than those in front of it. Axial sculpture restricted to feeble incrementals that minutely punctate the spiral sulci. Sutures faintly impressed. Aperture lobate, angulated and grooved at the posterior commissure. Outer lip expanding slightly anteriorly, varicose, the spiral sculpture of the body persistent across the varix. Inner lip smoothly and rather heavily glazed, the parietal wash merging into the pillar callus; labial varix continuous around the truncated anterior extremity of the aperture and joining the base of the pillar at rather a sharp angle. Umbilicus imperforate.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.4 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.9 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329036. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. The type is unique. The figure of Litiopa palaeosargassina Maury recalls Onolja. The shell, which I have never seen, must be moie slender than that of R. litiopaopsis, the aperture

less oblique and the umbilical chink moderately wide. Miss Maury's42 species was collected at Oak Grove.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.
Order ASPIDOBRANCHIA Suborder EHIPIDOG-LOSSA Superfamily NEEITAOEA
Family NEEITIDAE Subfamily SMAKAG-DINAE Genus SMARAGDIA Issel
Io69. Smaragdia Issel, Malacalogia del Mare Rosso, p. 212.
Type by subsequent designation (Bucquoy, Dautzenberg, and Dollfus, Mollusques marins du Eoussillon, vol. 1, p. 328, 1884) : Neritina feuilleti Audouin. Recent in the Red Sea.
Shell small, obliquely ovoid, thin-shelled for the group, imperforate. Spire very low, body relatively large and inflated. Basal surface semielliptical, the aperture occupying a little less than half the area. Outer margin of aperture thin, sharp, symmetrically arcuate. Columellar wall flattened, heavy calloused,, sunk beneath the level of the sharp apertural margin^ thin-edged and, in the later growth stages, serrate.
Smaragdia is found in much the same habitat as that favored by the larger and heavier Nerita the tropical and warm temperate shores bordered with rocks and coral reefs but according to the anatomists, it differs both from Nerita and from the nonmarine oriental Neritina in the unstalked, sessile eyes.
The family has received the attention of naturalists since the day of Aristotle, who first recorded the name Nerita and noted its habit of clinging to rocks. It is of unusual interest to the malacologist because there are certain anatomical characters that the Neritidae share with the Pulmonates.43 Color markings not zigzag, subequal and equispaced..........
Smaragdia grammica Gardner, n. sp. Color markings more or less zigzag, often broken and segre-
gated into groups of 3 to 5 ... .Smaragdia cMpolana (Dall).
Smaragdia grammica Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXII, figure 9
Shell very small, thin, elliptical, flattened on the apertural surface. Body obliquely flattened behind^ strongly and smoothly inflated medially. Protoconch and earliest whorls of conch broken away but doubtless low and small. Surface smooth but retaining a decided color pattern of slightly ragged, dark-brown lines, about 9 to the millimeter, separated by equal or slightly wider interspaces; color lines strongly protractive anteriorly, inclined to be broadly and feebly arcuate toward the suture and arcuate on the base^
42 Maury, C. J., New Oligocene shells from Florida: Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, pp. 28, 29, pi. 7. fig. 5, 1921.
43 Simroth, H., Some remarks with regard to Professor Bourne's Monograph on the Neritidae : Malacol. Soc. London Proc., vol. 9, p. 31, 1910.

608 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

forming concentric lines around the body callus. Aperture occupying a little less than half the basal surface, obliquely semielliptical, acutely angulated and feebly sulcated at the posterior commissure. Outer lip thin, sharp, asymmetrically arcuate. Inner wall of aperture oblique, reinforced. Glaze of the reflected inner lip spread in a broad arc from the posterior to the anterior extremity of the aperture, completely concealing the umbilicus.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.7 millimeters ; maximum diameter, 1.8 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351640. Type locality: No. 5079, half a mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. The inner margin of the pillar is smooth, so the shell is probably not mature, but the color pattern is so well preserved and so diagnostic that the form, imperfect as it is, has a systematic value. In Smaragdia chipolana the color lines are even finer than in 8. grammica and less ragged, commonly segregated into groups of three to five, and irregularly zigzagged. The type is unique. Smaragdia grammica suggests in outline a minute S. viridis (Linnaeus), but there is no trace in 8. grammica of the sea-green color that characterizes the West Indian species, both Recent and fossil, and the color pattern of S. grammica is much finer and distinct in its direction. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 5079r.
Snraragdia chipolana (Dall)
Plate LXH, figure 11
1892. Neritina chipolana Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 422, pi. 23, fig. 19.
Shell small, polished, smooth, with a low spire and three whorls; nucleus swollen, prominent, suture distinct; general form resembling that of N. pupa L.; aperture produced, the outer margin thin, the body with a moderately thick callus; at the base of the pillar lip is a slight projection, outside of which the callus is impressed; pillar above this prominence irregularly and minutely denticulate, the teeth when continuously present numbering ten or twelve. Alt. of shell 5.0; max. diam. 5.3 mm.
This neat little shell retains its color markings, which are composed of dark, narrow lines radiating from the axis and over the whorl in every conceivable form of zigzag or curve, either singly or in groups of three to five, either continuous or broken. In general, however, there is much more of the surface of an individual free from lines than covered by them a feature apparently characteristic of this form. Some rare varieties of N. riryinea Lam. exhibit much such a style of painting, but in that species when little triangles are formed the line bounding the triangle behind is always broader than elsewhere, giving the effect of a shadow; in N. chipolana the lines are not widened. Size and coloration being considered, there is no recent American species which approaches this one very closely. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112664.

Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
The protoconch is small, vitreous, and highly polished, immersed at the tip, and somewhat bulbous. The oblique line of demarcation between conch and protoconch is strongly defined. The conch is a little more than twice-coiled; the component whorls increase rapidly in size and are obscurely shouldered behind and well-rounded in front.
This small form is remarkable for the persistence of its color markings, which are curiously sketchy and oriental in design.
The species is restricted in its distribution to the Chipola formation. A single indeterminate juvenile was collected, however, from the Oak Grove sand. It differs from the Chipola form in the fewer and more rapidly increasing volutions and somewhat suggests in general outline the Recent Smaragdia viridis (Linnaeus).
Smaragdia grammica from Shoal River is ornamented with fine, subequal and equispaced, somewhat ragged, brownish-black lines. '
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212P, 2213C, 2564r, 3419r, 7151r, 2211r.
Superfamily TROCHACEA Family TRICOLHDAE Q-enus TBICOUA Risso
1826. Tricolia Risso, Histoire naturelle des principales productions de 1'Europe meridionale, vol. 4, p. 122.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 144, 1847): Turbo pullus Linnaeus. Recent from the British Isles to the Mediterranean.
Woodring44 noted Gray's error in the spelling of Risso's name, which appears on page 144 of Gray's Synopsis as Tricoled and in the index as Tricolaea,. The same type was designated two years later by Herrmannsen.*5
Shell small, porcelaneous; ovate-conic. Whorls rather numerous, closely appressed, moderately inflated. Surface usually smooth and polished, never strongly sculptured. Aperture holostomous, channeled posteriorly, broadly rounded anteriorly. Outer lip thin, sharp. Inner lip smoothly arcuate, folded back, glazing the body wall and either closing the umbilicus entirely or leaving only a crescentic chink along the outer margin. Operculum, in the genotype calcareous, convex on the outer surface, the maximum convexity on the side nearest the labium; smoothly concave on the inner surface, the nucleus spiral, excentric and anterior in position.
The type (Bwcdnum australis Gmelin) of Phc^sian^ ella, to which many of the species of Tricolia have been
44 Woodring, W. P., Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica : Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 418, 1928.
45 Herrmannsen, A. N., Indices generum malacozoorum, vol. 2, p. 589, 1849.

CTBNOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

609

commonly referred, is a large form, comparable in dimensions and general aspect to the larger Cuban' land shells. The operculum, however, is similar to that of Tricolia.
Umbilical pit almost or entirely concealed; shell ovate-conic. . Tricolia affinis chipolana Gardner, n. subsp.
Umbilical pit narrow, elongated, deep; shell low, turbinate.... Tricolia probrevis Gardner, n. sp.
Tricolia affinis chipolana Gardner, n. subsp.
Plate LX, figures 6, 13
1892. Phasianella afflnis C. B. Adams. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 382.
Not Phasianella afflnis C. B. Adams, Contributions to conchology, p. 67, 1850.
Shell small, varying widely in outline with the age of the individual. Young stout, the body whorl relatively much larger than the whorls of the spire. Adolescents and some adults ovate-conic; other adults rather elevated and slender. Whorls 7%, including the three-whorled nucleus. Initial nuclear whorl exceedingly small and almost entirely immersed; second whorl coiled in the same plane as the first but larger and more inflated; third whorl flattened on the summit near its origin but gradually assuming the outline of the whorls of the conch. Line between conch and protoconch marked by a faint and irregular sulcus and a slight change in the texture of the shell. Whorls of spire broadly inflated medially, feebly constricted at the sutures. Body whorl of adult rounded at the periphery, not much larger in some individuals than the final whorl of the spire. Surface smooth except for feeble incrementals and an occasional suggestion of miscroscopically fine spiral striae probably the remnants of a former color pattern rather than of a sculpture. Aperture ovate to semielliptical. Labrum thin, sharp, strongly arcuate. Columella smoothly excavated. Parietal wall glazed, the body wash separated from the lining of the labrum by a shallow sulcus. Labial margin reinforced in the umbilical region and in front of it. Umbilical chink narrow, elongated, obscurely keeled. Worn opercula similar in general character to that of the genotype associated with this form in the lower bed at Alum Bluff.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 8.6 millimeters; maximum, diameter, 4.2 millimeters. Dimensions of paratype: Height, 8.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 5.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329107. Paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114369. Holotype locality: No. 3419, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. Paratype locality: No. 2211, lower bed at Alum Bluff, on the Apalachicola River, Liberty County, Fla. The lower Miocene individuals have been united with the Recent T. affinis C. B. Adams from the West Indies. The Chipola form runs larger than the Recent, has

more whorls and a body that is relatively lower in proportion to the height of the spire. The nuclear characters of the two forms are similar. The young of T. chipolana are more conical than the adult T. probrevis and more attenuated basally. The umbilicus of the latter is narrowly but deeply perforate, while in the former the pit itself is concealed, although a small part of the umbilical area is exposed.
The shells of the analogous group from the Cercado formation of the Dominican Republic, to which Woodring in 1928, gave the name Tricolia, (Tricolia,) affinis gabbi,<YTm smaller than the Chipola shells. They have, on the average, a wider and deeper umbilical chink than the Recent forms, and the umbilical keel is more acute. In this character, also, the Chipola specimens are usually closer to the Dominican Cercado shells than to the Recent. Tricolia precursor Dall from the Tampa limestone is related, but the aperture is less expanded than in T, affinis chipolana, the inner lip is not quite so thin, and its margin more feeble and reverted in the umbilical area.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 2212C, 2213% 2564a, 3419a, 2211»r, 7183»; Oak Grove sand, locality ?2646r.
Tricolia probrevis Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LX, figure 8
1892. Phasianella ~brevi$ d'Orbigny. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 381.
Not Phasianella "brems d'Orbigny, 1843? Not Phasianella ~brevis C. B. Adams, 1850.
Shell minute, low, turbinate. Nucleus naticoid, made up of approximately 3 volutions, the initial coil for the most part immersed, the succeeding volutions moderately inflated, increasing regularly in size. Protoconch differentiated from conch by a slight break and a change in the texture of the shell. Whorls of conch a little less than 2, low and moderately inflated, the periphery of the body abruptly rounded but not angulated, the base more or less flattened. Surface smooth except for sinuous incremental striations. Sutures impressed. Aperture holostomous, ovate, wider in front than behind, and depressed at the base of the columella into an incipient spout. Outer lip thin, sharp, strongly arcuate. Inner lip smooth, feebly excavated. Parietal wall thinly glazed, the wash continuous with the feebly reflected labium; columella reinforced. Umbilicus narrow, arcuate; umbilical area sickle-shaped, widening anteriorly, the keel usually less acute than in T. affinis chipolana.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 2.0 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.8 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114434. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. The Recent species T. brews d'Orbigny has been referred to the subgenus Eulithidium Pilsbry, 1898, which

610 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

is characterized by a very low outline, highly inflated whorls, and usually a deeper umbilical pit than is found in T. probrevis. The Chipola form, T. probrevis, does not seem to differ in any superspecifically important characters from the associated T. affinis chipolana, which is a Tricolia (Tricolia).
Tricolia brews (d'Orbigny), the Kecent species with which this form has been confused, is more smoothly rounded than the Miocene form and more evenly turbinate in outline. The young of T. affinis ohipolana differ not only in the closed or less open umbilicus but also in the less inflated whorls, more .ovate-conical outline, and less flattened base. Faint traces of a color pattern of small rose-colored polka dots spirally arranged still persist on some individuals.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212% 2213C, 2211C ; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646?.
Family TURBINTDAE Gray
Genus ASTRAEA "Bolten" Roeding
1798. Astraea "Bolten" Roeding, Museum Boltenianum, pt. 2, p. 79.
Not Astrea Lamarck. 1801, Syst&me des animaux sans vertebres, p. 371. A coral.
1909. Astraea Ball, U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 59, p. 92.
Type by subsequent designation (Suter, Manual of New Zealand Mollusca, p. 166, 1913) : Trochus imperialis Gmelin=Trochus heliotropium Martyn. Recent off the coasts of New Zealand and neighboring islands.
The genotype is a rather large, thinnish, turbinate shell, adorned with scaly spirals; the periphery compressed and serrated by a series of triangular spines; the base widely umbilicate. The operculum is rather thick, smooth and oval, and the outer margin is pinched into a narrow cord. Of the subgenus Astraea s.s., only the section AstraUum has been recognized in the Alum Bluff deposits.

Astraea dalli (Maury)
Plate LX, figures 3, 11
1892. AstraUum sp. indet. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 385.
1910. Astralimn dalli Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, No. 21, p. 31, pi. 8, fig. 3.
Several specimens of a young Astralium were collected by Mr. Burns from the Chipola beds which are not the young of A. chipolamim. They have four whorls, which are rather depressed, and carry at the periphery eight rather long and slender imbricated spines; the upper surface just in front of the suture, which is overhung by the preceding whorl, is pinched up or fluted with a number of short folds, forming a sort of band on the upper margin of the whorl; in front of this the surface is more or less covered with oblique, close-set, imbricated lamellae, crossed by three or four fine spiral lines; the base is flattish, with four or five spiral, elevated, sometimes beaded, lines, and the umbilical carina is marked by two coarsely beaded spirals, the whole crossed by elevated, sometimes imbricated, radiating lines in harmony with the lines of growth. The base recalls that of A. lonyispina Lam., but the upper surface is quite different frem that species. The specimens are about 5 mm. in greatest diameter and 3.5 mm. high. Dall, 1892.
Shell small, depressed, trochiform, four-whorled, with eight slender spines at the periphery; surface of the whorls coarsely wrinkled just beneath the spines and finely wrinkled just above the spines. Between these wrinkled bands are four faint spirals generally seen only with a lens. Base rather flat with 4 or 5 raised threads, either smooth or slightly beaded.
Height of shell 3.5; greatest width 5 mm. Specimens of this species' were described in 1892, but not named by Doctor Dall to whom the shell is now dedicated. Chipola marls, Baileys Ferry, Florida. Cornell University collection. Maury, 1910.
Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 3.8 millimeters ; maximum diameter, 5.7 millimeters.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. MusT No. 112995.
Locality of figured specimen: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.

Section ASTRALUJM Link
1807. AstraUum Link, Beschreibung der Naturalien Sammlung der Universitat zu Rostock, p. 135.
Type by subsequent designation (Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, Miocene molhisks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 2, p. 412, 1928) : AstraUum deplanatum Link=Trochux costulatus Lamarck, regarded as a subspecies of Trochus longispina Lamarck. Recent in the West Indies.
Astralium has been commonly considered a synonym of Astraea but, following Woodring, it is here retained for the medium-sized, rather low, broadly conical astraeid shell, with a narrow or imperforate umbilicus and thickened operculum. In contrast also to Astraea s.s., AstraUum is characteristically a mid-American group.

The protoconch of A. dalli is similar to that of A. chipolana, Dall twice coiled, both volutions flattened and wound in a single plane but the conch of A. chipolana is more elevated than that of A. dalli, the sides more uniformly flattened, the peripheral spines more numerous and less produced, and the spiral sculpture sharper and moniliform.
Astraea dalli (Maury) from the Chipola formation has much the same general aspect as Astraliuni sul)lonyispinum Maury from the possibly synchronous Cercado formation of the Dominican Republic. The Chipola species, however, is smaller and imperforate, with obliquely flattened whorls, whereas the species from the Dominican Republic is perforate, with broadly inflated volutions.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213C, Cornell University collection.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

611

Subgenus LITHOPOMA J. E. Gray
1850. Lithopoma J. E. Gray. In M. E. Gray, Figures of molluscous animals, vol. 4, p. 88.
Type by monotypy: Trochus tuber Linnaeus. Recent in the West Indies.
Shell of moderate dimensions, broadly conical, with rounded or subacute periphery and flattened base; imperforate. Sculpture more or less nodose but not spinose. Operculum thickened, oval or ovate, the external surface granulated and commonly costate near the margin, inner face flattened and coiled about an eccentric submarginal nucleus.
The development of a crude cordate, strongly protractive axial sculpture at right angles to the direction of the growth lines is a characteristic feature of the subgenotype and many other species of the Lithopoma, group. The subgenus was founded on the character of the operculum.
The Recent species are, for the most part, restricted to the Florida Keys and the West Indies.
Astraea (Lithopoma) chipolana (Dall)
Plate LX, figures 15, 16, 30
1892. Astralium (Lithopoma) chipohnium Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, iA. 2, p. 384, pi. 18, fig. 6a.
Shell small, elevated-trochiform, with flattened sides and base and seven or eight whorls ; nucleus minute, the first two or three whorls flattened above, coiled in a single plane, then taking on the adult habit in the remainder of the shell; periphery keeled, the carina furnished with ten or twelve triangular, imbricate spinose projections, underneath which the suture is closely appressed; above, between the suture and the periphery, are five low spiral, beaded bands, between which are single smaller intercalary threads, all of which march straight a-ouud the whorl without fluctuation; on the base between the periphery and pillar are about- eight beaded spirals, alternated in strength; across the spiral sculpture, obliquely, especially toward the apex, run well-marked but not lamellose incremental lines; pillar narrow, arched, with a faint groove behind it, terminating in one or two feeble tubercles; aperture rounded quadrate, outer lip thin, body with a wash of callus. Alt. 11.5; max. diarn. 11.0 mm.
This interesting little shell is without doubt the forerunner of the following species [Astraliutn (Lithopoma) precursor Dall], but differs from it and from all the Recent forms in the low, rectilinear sculpture and the absence of any plications on the side of the whorl except at the periphery. Dall. 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112994. Figured opercurum: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114439. Type locality: No. 2211, Alum Bluff (lower bed), Liberty County, Fla. Locality of figured operculum: No. 2211, lower bed, Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla. The operculum is thick and slightly ovate, the inner face flattened and exhibiting 4 or 5 whorls coiled about an eccentric nucleus placed near the margin of the smaller end. The external surface is much thickened at the^arger end near the pillar, thinning gradually

away from it with the exception of a slight irregular deposit over the nucleus. The posterior margin of the operculum is pinched into a thin flange, the inner limit of the flange marked by an ill-defined arcuate rib subparallel to the outer margin. The surface is finely granulated except over the nucleus.
The species is known only from the type locality. The operculum has not been found in place, but as both the shells and the opercula are fairly common at the single locality at which they are represented and as no other Lithopoma has been recognized from the horizon except a very much smaller species, there seems to be little cause to doubt their identity.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2211C.
Genus GELASINOSTOMA Gardner, n. gen.
Type by original designation: Collonia elegantula Dall. Caloosahatchee formation (Pliocene) of Florida and the Waccamaw formation (Pliocene) of North Carolina.
Shell small, rather thin, depressed, paucispiral; the early whorls in the genotype broadly shouldered, the later more evenly inflated. Protoconch minute, glassy, including a single loop, slightly tilted and enlarging. Conch with an occasional high light, which may be a touch of nacre; the beginnings of the shoulder and the spiral sculpture obscurely visible within the first half turn. Both coarse and fine spirals developed on the early whorls of the genotype; only the fine on the later. Aperture subcircular. Margin of outer lip crenate in the juveniles, thickened and rolled back slightly in the adult. Peristome depressed slightly at the posterior commissure, adnate to the body wall from the commissure to the umbilical pit, thickened in front of the umbilicus and dimpled at the extremity of the very heavy circumumbilical rib. Umbilical pit extremely small, bordered by the conspicuously elevated rib.
The depression of the peristome at the extremity of the umbilical keel is a distinctive character not shared by any other group that I know. In Delphinula marginata Lamarck, the genotype of Collonia, the protoconch is naticoid, and the umbilicus is not so small. The spiral within the umbilicus in typical Collonia, terminates in a marginal tubercle, but there is no nick at the extremity of the rib at the margin of the umbilicus. In Delphinula striata Lamarck, the genotype of Cirsochilus Cossmann, the character of the spiral sculpture is similar to that of Gelasinostoma, but the protoconch is naticoid, and the umbilicus larger; the marginal rib is crenate like that of Delphinula marginata, not conspicuously elevated and not nicked at its extremity. The characters of the umbilicus are similar, in a general way, in Collonia Gray, Cirsochilus Cossmann, and Otollonia Woodring and serve to separate these groups from Gelasinostoma.

612 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Gelasinostoma has a meagre representation in the Gulf Tertiary possibly from the Eocene to the Pliocene, but it is restricted in its known distribution to the Gulf area and the Tertiary period. Collonia claibornensis Ball may be referable to Gelasinostoma, but the protoconch is lost, the rib at the margin of the umbilicus is less elevated than in the later Tertiary species, and the aperture is so imperfect that the characters of the inner lip are not definitely known.
Gelasinostoma chipolanum (Dall)
Plate LXII, figure 12
1892. Collonia chipolana Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 387.
Shell small, resembling a young specimen of O. eleganttda, but with much finer sculpture, rounder whorls, no tabulation at the shoulder, a less prominent projection where the umbilical rib impinges on the aperture, and a decidedly thinner and smaller shell. There are about four whorls, which do not complete the growth, as the unique specimen is immature; they are rounded, with a distinct suture and finely spirally striated; the aperture resembles in a general way that of a young C. elegantula. Alt. of shell 2.2 [1.9] ; max. diam. 2.0 [1.9] mm.
The shell, though immature, is an unmistakable Collonia, and I have described it, lest it should be lost sight of, being the only representative of the group in the Chipola Miocene. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113001. Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. No other representative of the species or of the genus has been found at any horizon in the Alum Bluff group. Occurrence: Chopola formation, locality 2212r.
Genus LIOTIA Gray
1842. Liotia Gray, Synopsis of the contents of the British Museum, 44th ed., p. 57 (genus without species). Fide Iredale, 1913.
1847. Liotla Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 145.
Type by original designation: DelpMnula cancellata Gray. Kecent on the Pacific Coast from Peru to Chile.
Small, low, turbinate, thick-shelled, the inner layer subnacreous. Sculpture commonly spiral or reticulate, knotted at the intersections, the incrementals sharp, laminar, radial in arrangement on the base. Aperture obliquely subcircular. Peristome continuous, much thickened, simple within, adnate to the body wall only along its base. Umbilicus funicular, open to the apex, the keel crenate, but no spirals developed within the funnel. Operculum according to Pilsbry and Thiele, multispiral, horny, with a pearly inner layer of spirally disposed particles.
Liotia, s.s., is best characterized by the low, thick shell, crude but strong sculpture, thickened peristome,

adnate only at the extreme base of the body, so that the last half turn of the body is thrown out of the plane in which the earlier whorls are coiled.
Liotia, s.s., is best developed in Pacific waters, for the most part in tropical and south-temperate seas.
Subgenus ABENE H. and A. Adams
1854. Arene H. and A. Adams, Genera of Recent Mollusca, vol. 1, p. 404.
Type by subsequent designation (Woodring, W. P., Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 422, 1928): Turbo cruentatus Megerle von Miihlfeld. Recent in the West Indies.
Shell radiately painted with red; whorls muricated, the last stellate at the periphery, or angulated and keeled; peritreme more or less varicose. H. and A. Adams, 1854.
The greater number of the West Atlantic Liota, both fossil and Kecent, are referable to Arene rather than to Liotia, s.s. The shells referable to Arene are commonly smaller than those of Liotia, s.s. and less heavy. The sculpture is less crude, and is spiny rather than nodose. The peripheral spiral upon the body is commonly emphasized and in the genotype is corronated with flattened spines, giving the stellate aspect observed by the Adamses.
Liotia (Arene) agenea Dall
Plate LX, figure 32
1892. Liotia (Arene) agenea Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 410, pi. 23, fig. 3.
Shell small, with four whorls, the whorls tricarinate, the umbilicus wide, rapidly narrowing, funicular, the outer margin bordered by a crenate rib; suture distinct; transverse sculpture of fine, elevated, close-set lines, which are usually a little gathered up, close to the suture, into short wrinkles; aperture nearly circular, slightly thickened, the outer margin angulate from the ends of the keels. Alt. 2.0; max. diam. 2.5 mm.
This little shell is the precursor of L. gemma of the Newer Miocene and the variety trlcarinata Stearns of the Pliocene and recent faunas. From them it differs in its much smaller size and relatively much wider umbilicus. It seems to be very rare in the marl. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113091. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla. The species has not been found in any of the later collections. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.
Genus DIDIANEMA Woodring
1928. Di&ianema Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 447.
Type by original designation: Didianema tytha Woodring. Miocene of Bowden, Jamaica.
Shell very small, polished, relatively thick, spire low, body

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

613

whorl strongly inflated, umbilical opening moderately wide. Aperture subcircular, peristome complete, expanded at contact with body whorl. Outer lip, as viewed from above, arched forward between suture and periphery. Basal lip almost straight. Within aperture and visible on inner lip and parietal wall lies «i narrow shelf against which the operculum probably fitted. Basal lip excavated at junction with inner lip. At outer edge of umbilicus are two spiral threads disappearing upward into umbilicus, the inner one disappearing first. Woodring, 1928.
Didianema recalls Molleria Jeffreys in the development of the small opercular shelf, and it may well be the southern representative of that genus. The northern form commonly exhibits a crude axial sculpture of which there is no trace in Didianema, and it is not carmate at the margin of the umbilicus. The type of Molleria is Margaritaf costulata Moller, widespread in the North Atlantic and reported off Fernandina, Fla., in 294 fathoms. It is probable that a number of the Tertiary species from the South Atlantic now referred to Molleria are more properly referable to the southern genus, but the absence of the beading on the umbilical keel and of the spirals within the umbilical funnel may be of more than specific importance.
Didianema? waltonia Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LX, figure 7
Shell minute but rather solid, turbinate. Whorls between S1/^ and 4, closely appressed, increasing regularly in size. Protoconch not well differentiated but probably including a little more than a single volution, distinguished only by its more highly polished surface and slightly greater inflation. Surface dull, unsculptured. Suture line distinct, feebly impressed, dropped forward a trifle at the aperture. Periphery of body broadly and smoothly rounded. Aperture semielliptical, feebly sulcate at the posterior commissure. Outer margin broadly and symmetrically arcuate, the inner feebly excavated, furnished with an inner rim for the support of the edge of the operculum. Parietal glaze heavy. Pillar free, slightly reverted. Umbilical area differentiated by a sort of basal disk extending from the inner wall of the umbilicus outward to the obtuse margin of the carina. Umbilical perforation small but probably deep.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.4 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351638.
Type locality: No. 3732, Dave Adams Mill Creek, sec. 2, T. 3 N., R. 21 W., Walton County, Fla.
Molleria duplinensis Dall is less minute and has a roughened outer surface and an umbilical pit margined by an angulated carina. It should probably be referred to Didianema, though it lacks the beading on the keel and the spirals within the umbilical funnel. In M. minuscula Dall, from the St. Marys formation of

Maryland, the base is smoothly rounded and the outline that of true Molleria.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 3732r.
Family SKENEIDAE
Genus TEINOSTOMA A. Adams
1853. Teinostoma A. Adams, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 21, p. 183.
Type by monotypy: Teinostoma politum A. Adams. Recent off the coast of Ecuador.
The type of Teinostoma is a very solid lenticular little shell of auriculate outline. The periphery is sharply rounded, the surface highly polished and devoid of sculpture. The suture line may be faintly traced on the apical surface as a rapidly opening spiral. The basal disk is opaque, clearly defined, and evenly spread from the axis about halfway out to the periphery. The aperture is ovate trigonal, the outer lip and compressed periphery of the body forming roughly a straight line, the lip expanding and pulled out and sharply rounded at the periphery. The inner margin of the aperture is smoothly concave and calloused. There is no sulcus at the posterior commissure, and the parietal callus merges smoothly into the pad, which completely closes the umbilicus. The few specimens of Teinostoma politum examined run between 5 and 10 millimeters in their greatest dimension, a size appreciably larger than any of the Tertiary species considered.
The majority of the east coast Tertiary species are referable to Idioraphe Pilsbry.
The genus is known in the Tertiary beds of the east coast of North America and in the Paris Basin. The Recent forms occur most abundantly in the China and Japan Seas, although there are a few representatives in the tropical and subtropical waters of eastern America. Surface sculptured with exceedingly fine spirals .............
Teinostoma chipolanum Dall. Surface entirely smooth, polished :
Body obscurely shouldered ............................ Teinostoma nanwm eonanum Gardner, n. subsp.
Body not shouldered: Apical surface smoothly but feebly arched; outer lip thin, sharp . . . Teinostoma phacoton Gardmer, n. sp. Apical surface not arched; outer lip thickened slightly Teinostoma mekon Gardner, n. sp.
Section IDIORAPHE Pilsbry
1922. Idioraphe Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 73, pt. 2, p. 398.
Type by original designation: Cyclops angulatus Gabb. Miocene of the Dominican Republic.
The section is characterized "by having the whorls enveloping, the suture at first closely coiled, but in the last whorl deviating abruptly." The periphery on the first half of the body whorl in the type is distinctly carinate, and the apical surface is domed. These last

614 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

characters are apparently not essential, for Teinostoma depressum, the only other species referred to Idioraphe in the original description, is depressed and the periphery is rounded.
Teinostoma chipolanum Dall
Plate LXI, figures 12, 13
1892. Teinostoma cliipolanum Dall. Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 413, pi. 23, figs. 6, 7.
Shell small, tumid, somewhat neritiform, three-whorled; surface polished with microscopic revolving striae; dome of the spire slightly gibbous; a little flattened between the suture and the periphery; base flattish, the spiral striae stronger below; aperture small, nearly circular, somewhat pointed at the upper commissure; umbilicus solidly filled with smooth callus, which extends across the body to the outer lip: inner lip at certain stages of growth separated from the callus by a small groove, at other times the surface is continuous and smooth. Alt. 1.0; max. diam. of base 2.3; min. diam. 1.8 mm.
This curious little shell is well distinguished by its gibbous form. The spirals are only visible in a good light and on a perfectly unworn specimen. Dall, 1892.
Lectotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. 113101. Type locality: No. 2212, \ mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla. The individuals from Alum Bluff are less feebly striated than those from the Chipola Eiver. Teinostoma phacoton from Alum Bluff is smaller, thinner, and destitute of spiral sculpture. - Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 2212C, 2213C, 2211P.
Teinostoma nanum eonanum Gardner, n. subsp.
Plate LXI, figures 8-10
Shell minute but solid, discoidal, lustrous, paucispiral. Outer margin of the body drawn up over the spire, almost entirely concealing it. Periphery sharply rounded. Body obliquely flattened behind the periphery. Base feebly convex, tending to develop an obtuse umbilical keel near the aperture. Surface smooth, highly polished, microscopically striated with incrementals. Aperture broken, probably transversely elongated. Outer lip thin, sharp. Peristome feebly sulcated at the commissure. Parietal wash rather thin, continuous with the umbilical and pillar callus. Inner margin of aperture sinuous, expanding a little along the body wall, constricted in the umbilical region. Umbilicus entirely filled with a smooth, flat pad of callus that anteriorly extends to the obscure carina, where it merges into the base without perceptible demarcation, although along the posterior margin it is clearly differentiated.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 0.9 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.7 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351G34.

Type locality: No. 3733, three quarters of a mile west of Shell Bluff, Shoal Eiver, Walton County, Fla.
The subspecies T. nanum eonanum is, apparently the herald of a group that was widespread in the upper Miocene of the Atlantic seaboard. Teinostoma nanum Isaac Lea is recorded in the Yorktown formation of Virginia and North Carolina, in the Duplin marl of North and South Carolina, and in the Choctawhatchee formation (Area zone) of Florida. The Walton County shell is less compressed than the later Miocene forms, and the doming of the apical surface, particularly toward the aperture, is more pronounced.
Teinostoma phacoton from Alum Bluff is more lentiform than T. nanum eonanum and is feebly but smoothly arched on the apical surface.
The species is known only from the type and one other individual.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 3733 r.
Teinostoma phacoton Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXI, figures 19-21
Shell minute, lentiform, auriculate. Apical surface broadly and feebly arched. Base obliquely flattened. Periphery sharply rounded. Body whorl embracing and entirely concealing the spire in the adult. Sutures enameled. Protoconch not exposed. Surface smooth, the glaze scratched by microscopically fine incrementals. Aperture semielliptical, obtusely angulated at the posterior commissure, which falls a little behind the periphery. Outer lip slightly flexuous, semielliptical, a little broader than it is long. Inner lip feebly convex, adnate to the body wall. Parietal wash thin. Umbilical pad moderately thick, semielliptical, asymmetric in position.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 0.7 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.45 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329124. Type locality: No. 7183, Alum Bluff (lower bed), Liberty County, Fla. The coexistent T. chipolanum Dall is larger and not so compressed as T. phacoton and exhibits, furthermore, a feeble spiral sculpture. T. nanum eonanum, from the Shoal Eiver formation, is less uniformly compressed than T. phacoton and is obscurely angulated at the shoulder. The species is known only from the type locality. Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 7183P.
Teinostoma mekon Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXI, figures 15-17
Shell minutely auriculate, rather thin for the group but not vitreous, highly polished. Shell of 2 conchal and l!/2 protoconchal turns, the nuclear feebly inflated and partially immersed in the postnuclear whorls. Line between conch and protoconch indicated

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

615

by the slight flattening of the shell and by the higher luster of the postnuclear turns. On the first whorl of the conch only a narrow area of the flattened posterior portion exposed, the rest of the whorl concealed by the overlap of the body. Body well-rounded, not flattened posteriorly, evenly inflated from the appressed suture to the basal disc. Suture distinct, a faint striation directly in front of the suture limiting the appressed margin. Callus of basal disc extending about halfway from the umbilicus to the periphery. Umbilicus imperforate but indicated by a rather deep depression. Aperture subcircular, sinuous, the outer lip expanded behind the periphery, the inner lip contracted and reinforced at the margin of the basal callus. Margin of outer lip thickened slightly and pushed back across the appressed sutural margin. Parietal wash heavy, appearing as a linguiform process between the commissure and the basal disc; continuous with the callus of the outer lip and of the disc.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 0.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.4 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498396. Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the-bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. Collection made by the Geological Survey of the State of Florida and presented to the U. S. Geological Survey. Teinostom.a mekon is the smallest recognized representative of this genus of minute shells. Its apparent maturity is indicated by the thickening of the outer lip, the relatively heavy parietal wash, and the callus of the umbilical area. The thickening of the outer lip is a character that sets this species apart from the other Teinostoma of the area, and the character of the coiling probably excludes it from the section Idioraphe. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 14436r.
Genus SOLABIOEBIS Conrad
1865. Solariorbis Conrad, Am. Jour. Conchology, vol. 1, p. 30.
Type by subsequent designation (Ball, W. H., Wagiiei- Free Inst. Sci. Tvans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 414, 1892) : Dclphimda depressa Isaac Lea. Claiborne sand of Alabama.
Small, depressed, moderately thick-shelled. Nucleus small but fairly prominent, smooth, shining, paucispiral. Surface of conch finely punctate spirally. Aperture entire, subcircular. Peristome angulated and feebly sulcate at the commissure. Parietal wash heavy. Umbilical perforation small but deep, partially concealed by the thickening of the umbilical carina toward the aperture.
Conrad's genus includes a compact group of Tertiary forms characterized by the depressed apical surface,

finely punctate spiral sculpture, and small umbilical pit.
Solariorbis is restricted in its known distribution to the Tertiary, and in the Alum Bluff group it is restricted to the Chipola formation and the Oak Grove
sand.

Solariorbis microforatis Dall

Plate LXI, figures 11, 14

1892. 1898.

Teinostoma (Solariorbis) microforatis Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 415.
Teinostoma microforatis Dall., idem, pt. 4, p. 918, pi. 23, figs. 9, 10.

Shell large for the genus, with four or five whorls; surface polished, sculptured; spire flattened; upper surface of the whorl with two spiral subequal ribs, one close to and in front of the suture, the other near the periphery and having the suture laid upon it; surface between these ribs slightly convex, sculptured with numerous fine sharp spiral grooves crossed by numerous rather distant impressed lines of growth, producing a punctate effect at the intersections; periphery rounded, base moderately convex, with a sculpture similar to that of the spire, but stronger, increasing in strength and in the width of the interspaces toward the umbilical area, which is nearly smooth and evenly rounded; aperture rounded, oblique, angulated at the upper commissure and by the rib; pillar thin and short, at its base supported by a triangular thickening due to a stout projecting umbilical rib which overhangs and screens the small perforate umbilicus. Alt. of shell 2.3; max. diarn. 4.7; min. diam. 3.7. mm.
The nucleus of this handsome little shell is swollen and prominent, almost as if it might be sinistral, and immersed in the spire. There is no callus on the pillar or umbilicus, and, viewed vertically from below, the shell seems imperforate, but under the shadow of the thick rounded umbilical rib there is a small perforate umbilicus, essentially as in LeucorhyncMa.
The species is nearest T. quadrangulare Meyer, but has no angle at the periphery of the base, the umbilical area is proportionately smaller, and the end of the rib less broad and prominent. Meyer's species seems also to be a much smaller shell, and has a conical, not flattened, spire. Dall. 1892.

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113108. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Both the genus and the species are exceptionally well characterized. Occurrence: Chipola formation, 2212r, 2213», 3419», 2211r ; Oak Grove sand, 2646r, 5632r.

Family TROCHIDAE Subfamily MONODONTINAE Genus CHLOEOSTOMA Swainson
1840. Chlorostotna £wainson. Treatise on malacology, pp. 218, 350.
Type by subsequent designation (Herrmannsen, A. N., Indicis generum malacozoorum, vol. 1, p. 231, 1846) : Trochus argyrostomus Gmelin. Recent in the Indo-Pacific.

616 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

The genotype is a moderately large, high conical shell of dark color, imperforate, and corrugated with protractive riblets. Chlorostoma, s.s. is not known in the East American faunas, either from the Tertiary deposits or in the Eecent seas.

Subgenus OMPHAUTJS Philippi

1847. Omphalius Philippi. Zeitschr. Malakozoologie, Jahrg. 4, p. 21.

Type by subsequent designation (Herrmannsen, A. N., Indicis generum malacozoorum, vol. 2, p. 146,1847) : Trochus rusticus Gmelin. Eecent in the Sea of Japan.
Systematic recognition is grudgingly accorded this ill-defined group of usually perforate trochoid shells with a subdued spiral or granose sculpture and a denticle at the extremity of the circum-nmbilical cord.

Surface threaded with raised lirae; periphery sharply rounded

or obtusely carinate ....

.......... . ............

Cfhlorostoma (Omphalius) exolutum (Conrad).

Surface threaded with spiral color bands but not with raised

lirae; periphery acutely bicarinate . ... .................

Chlorostoma (Omphalius) exolutum limatum Dall.

Chlorostoma (Omphalius) exolutum (Conrad)
Plate LX, figures 4, 12
1843. Monodonta exoluta Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 1, p. 309.
1856. Monodonta kiawahensis Tuomey and Holmes, Pliocene fossils of South Carolina, p. 116, pi. 26, fig. 1.
1863. Motnlia (Monodonta) exoluta Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, vol. 14, p. 569.
1887. Turbo heliciformis Heilprin, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 1, p. 113, pi. 16, fig. 55.
1892. Chlorostoma (OmpJialius) exoletum Conrad. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 388, pi. 17, figs. 4, 4a.
1903. Chlorostoma exoletum Conrad. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 6, p. 1601. (Check list of species from "Duplin Miocene" of North Carolina.)
1915. Tegula (Omphalius) exoleta Conrad. Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. Ill, pi. 16, figs. 15-16.
1919. Chlorostoma (Omphalius) exoleta Conrad. Gardner and Aldrich, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 71, p. 18. (Check list of species from Muldrow Place, 5 miles southeast of Mayesville, Sumter County, S. C.).
1929. Tegula exoleta (Conrad). Cooke and Mossom, Florida Geol. Survey 20th Ann. Rept., 1927-1928, p. 139, pi. 16, figs. 9a-9b.
1930. Tegnla (Omphalius) exoleta (Conrad). Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 3, p. 131, pi. 17, figs. 9a-9b.
1937. Tegula (Omphalius) exoleta, (Conrad). Mansfield, Florida Geol. Survey Bull. 15, p. 181.
Depressed; volutions slightly convex, with revolving lines, most prominent on the periphery and base; 7 or 8 lines on the base increasing in size towards the umbilicus, which is profound ; labrum with a series of minute short prominent irregular lines on the inner submargin; tooth at base of columella small, transverse, somewhat compressed; beneath is a smaller pyramidal tooth; aperture round, more than half the length of the shell.. Width nearly half inch. Conrad, 1843.

Type locality not given.
Dimensions of figured specimen: Height, 12 millimeters; maximum diameter, 13 millimeters.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112572.
Locality of figured specimen: Orthaulax bed, Ballast Point, Tampa Bay, Fla.
Shell nacreous within, solid, depressed, more or less irregularly trochiform. Whorls approximately 4. Peripheral carina obscure, evanescent toward the aperture. Surface spirally threaded. Lirations simple, linear, separated by wider interspaces, 4 to 7 on the ultima behind the periphery, 7 or 8 on the base. Occasional fortuitous secondaries introduced. Incrementals commonly conspicuous, obliquely intersecting the spirals in a line approximately parallel to the margin of the outer lip. Suture distinct, not coincident with the peripheral angle of the preceding whorl in all individuals but in some a little in front of it. Aperture holostomons, subcircular. Labrum sharp, broadly arcuate. Labium solid, strongly concave, bidenticulate anteriorly, the posterior tooth the stronger. Parietal wall heavily glazed. Umbilicus persistent to the apex of the spire.
The shells have a weathered appearance, as a rule, as though the spirals had once been granular and had since been eroded until almost smooth. This is due, in large part, to the preservation of the color pattern. The primaries are irregularly barred in alternating lighter and darker tones, thus lending to the spirals a slightly undulatory aspect, which at first glance is deceptive.
The Alum Bluff material, though meager and for the most part immature, indicates an interesting gradation between the typical and the varietal form. The specimens from Alum Bluff, DalPs locality for the subspecies, are most of them without any trace of a raised spiral liration. The single young individual from Oak Grove and those from Boynton Landing are strongly threaded and differ from the normal C. exolutum only in the more sharply angulated double keel. The Chipola Eiver specimens are intermediate between these two.
Dall, 1892, considered the specific name of Conrad, exoluta, a typographical error. Doubtless Conrad had in mind the Latin word meaning old, an attribute suggested by the weathered appearance of the shell. But there is no evidence that he recognized his error, for 20 years after he published his original description he repeated, without comment in a check list, the name as originally printed. The rules of nomenclature do not permit the correction of the misspelled Latin adjective.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 7893r, 2211P, 7183 r ; Oak Grove sand, localities 3386r, 2646r, 9961 r .
Outside occurrence: "Silex beds" of Tampa limestone, Florida; Yorktown formation, North Carolina; Duplin marl, North Carolina-South Carolina; Cancel-

CTBNOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

617

laria zone, Choctawhatchee formation, northern Florida.
The Eecent species, for the most part, are warm water and intertidal.
Chlorostoma (Omphalius) exolutum limatum Dall
Plate LX, figures 9-10
1892. Chlorostoma (exoletwm var. ?) Umatum Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 389.
This, which may prove with more material to be a distinct species, differs from G. exoletwm by its nearly smooth surface, and, in the young, by having one or two keels near the periphery, which are the more prominent from the general smoothness of the shell; and a somewhat smaller umbilicus bounded by a strongly annulated or transversely wrinkled rib; the shell is on the whole more depressed than exoletwm, but has similar, though fewer, lines, articulated with dark and light color. The most nearly adult specimen measures 7 mm. high by about 9.5 mm. in greatest diameter. It is a variation from exoletum in the direction of C. fasciatum Born. Dall, 1892.
Dimensions of lectotype: Height, 5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 7.3 millimeters.
Lectotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329112. Lectotype locality: No. 3419, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla. The majority of the forms from the Chipola River are nearer the type of the species than are those from Alum Bluff. They show at most only faint traces of spiral lirae, but they are less strongly bicarinate than the typical limatum. The umbilical characters a relatively small pit margined by a transversely rugose rib suggest the subspecies. The specimen chosen for figuring is from the Chipola River, for it is very much more perfect than any in the collections from Alum Bluff. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213», 2564r, 3419P, 2211P.
Chlorostoma (Omphalius) sp. indet.
An immature and imperfect Chlorostoma that does not seem to be referable to any described species was collected in the De Funiak Cardium beds. It suggests a young Chlorostoma fasciatum (Born) in its absence of spiral sculpture, but it is more depressed on the

apical surface, and there are faint radial puckerings in front of the suture line which do not seem to be developed in the later form. The basal surface, however, is more strongly rounded, the umbilical keel acute and crenulate, and there is no suggestion of a concave depression just within the keel such as that in Chlorostoma fasciatum.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 7264r.
Subfamily OALUOSTOMATINAE Genus CALUOSTOMA Swainson
1840. Calliostoma Swainson, Treatise on malacology, pp. 218219, 351.
Type by subsequent designation (Herrmannsen, A. N., Indicis generum malacozoorum, vol. 1, p. 154,1846) : Trochus conulus Linnaeus. Recent in the Mediterranean Sea.
Imperforate: spire elevated, acute; aperture broader than high, transversely ovate, hardly sinuated at the base, and slightly oblique; shells almost smooth, and often polished. Swainson, 1840.
Shell nacreous within, imperforate, or more rarely perforate, rather solid, pyramidal in outline. Spire acute. Whorls numerous, usually more or less flattened laterally, smooth or exquisitely sculptured with simple or granular spirals. Body whorl angular or carinated. Base flattened or slightly convex. Aperture subquadrate. Outer lip sharp, retractive. Inner lip simple, thickened, dentate or subdentate anteriorly.
Calliostoma, includes a large number of fossil species. The recognized Gulf species are all of them post-Eocene, but the genus is present in the upper Eocene of the Anglo-Parisian Basin. The number of Recent species is large and their distribution world-wide in waters ranging from a few feet to 500 fathoms in depth. The color and sculpture of the forms render them conspicuous for their beauty.
The perforate Calliostomas are entirely restricted to the Shoal River formation, and they are abundant within that limited area. The imperforate Calliostomas occur most commonly, though not abundantly, at Alum Bluff and along the Chipola River.

Umbilicus imperforate or narrowly perforate; outline moderately high, pyramidal: Surface of whorls spirally lira ted : Spirals simple ... ....:.. ....................................................... Calliostoma orammaticum Dall. Spirals moniliform; sutures not overhung by periphery of preceding volution: Spirals more than 3 to the whorl .................................................... Calliostoma metrium Dall. Spirals 3 to the whorl ............................... ................. Calliostoma rhombotoide Gardner, n. sp. Spirals articulated by the iucrementals; sutures overhung by periphery of preceding volution ................ ... Calliostoma ceramicum Dall.
Surface of whorls smooth except for 2 or 3 faintly incised lines in front of the anterior suture. .... .Calliostoma extte Dall. Umbilicus perforate; outline low, broad:
Entire surface spirally lirate ................................................. Calliostoma flumenvatkim Gardner, n. sp. Surface smooth except for the two earliest whorls and the umbilical region ......... .Calliostoma ruaabasis Gardner, n. sp.

618 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Calliostoma grammaticum Dall
Plate LX, figure 35
1892. Calliostoma gra-mmaticum Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2. p. 397, pi. 18, fig. 2a.
Shell with seven whorls, the nucleus small and smooth, the remaining whorls strongly spirally sculptured; the periphery is smooth and rounded, overhanging like a broad rib the suture, which is closely appiessed below it; between the suture and the peripheral rib are three to five strong, smooth spirals, disposed in scalar fashion like steps up the spire, with sharp-cut interspaces, the number increasing by intercalation, and the area they cover slightly impressed; there is no finer sculpture on the spire; the base is gently rounded, flatfish, smooth except for wavy incremental lines and two or three strong spirals close to the umbilical region, which is bounded by a swollen rib and imperforate; pillar arched, a blunt tooth at the base; aperture ovate-quadrangular, smooth inside; the young have the base flatter, with obscure, impressed spiral lines and a single feeble thread near the periphery. Alt. and diameter, 13.5 mm.
This fine species, with its uniform smooth clean-cut spirals, is very distinctive and unlike any other in the American Tertiary. Dall, 1892.
Cotypes: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113'038. Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed, Alum Bluff, Apalachicola River, Liberty County, Fla.
The figure is a composite of the cotypes the final 214 whorls of an adult and a juvenile of 6 whorls.
A few immature individuals from the Chipola beds suggest C. grammaticum in general contour, character of the nuclear whorls, and basal sculpture. The spiral sculpture on the sides of the whorls is restricted, however, to the strong peripheral rib directly behind the posterior suture, a sharply impressed line directly in front of the posterior suture, and occasional faintly impressed lines on the medial portion of the whorl. It is impossible without adult material to determine the relation of these forms to C. grammaticum.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities ?2213r, 2564r, 3419r, 2211C, 7
Calliostoma metrium Dall
Plate LX, figure 37
1892. Calliostoma metrium Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 394, pi. 22, fig. 27.
1915. Calliostoma metrium Dall, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. Ill, pi. 15, fig. 8 (in part).
Shell large, extreme'y thin, conical, with the surface between the sutures flat or slightly concave, with seven or more whorls exclusive of the nucleus; spiral sculpture of subequal, closeset, flattened threads covering nearly all of the whorl, with narrower interspaces in which, on the later whorls, runs generally a much smaller, simple, elevated line; a few of the spirals on either side the suture are adjacent to one another, the peripheral spiral on which the suture is wound is simple, the others are obliquely articulated by impressed incremental lines; the suture is closely appressed and inconspicuous; the base ap-

pears to be imperforate, with the primary spirals becoming stronger toward the axis; pillar stout, with a moderate fascicle behind it; aperture not visible in the specimen. Alt. of shell, without the nucleus, 18 [20.5] ; max. diam. of last whorl 20 [20.5] ; min. diam. 18 mm. [18.5].
A single specimen of this well-marked species was obtained by Mr. Burns, but the shell is so thin that it is not practicable to remove the indurated matrix from the aperture. The species is not likely to be confoiinded with any other of OTtr coast, either recent or fossil. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. 113025.
Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
The type is the only individual yet collected from the Alum Bluff group, and Mansfield has not recognized it in the Tampa limestone.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.
Calliostoma exile Dall
Plate LXII, figure 5
1892. Calliostoma exile Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 397.
Shell acute-conical, with more than four whorls, the apex of the specimen decollated; whorls smooth except for lines of growth and two or three fine, incised spiral lines just above the periphery; periphery prominent, rounded, slightly overhanging the suture; base smooth or sparsely spirally striated, imperforate, impressed, so that the periphery when the shell is held base upward is elevated and forms a narrow, raised margin around the impressed area it encloses; aperture subquadrate, wider than high. Alt. of shell with the last whorl deficient about 7.0 [6] ; max. diam. 5.5 mm.
Though represented by a very imperfect, single specimen, this shell is undoubtedly different from either fossil or recent forms from our coast yet known, and recalls the European C. conulus. I have delayed figuring it in the hope of securing a better specimen, but the characters are so distinct that it cannot be mistaken for any other American species. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113041.
Type locality: No. 2211, lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.
A single immature individual probably referable to this species was collected 1 mile below Baileys Ferry on the Chipola River. It is so young that it represents little more than the area covered by the decollated apex in the type. The nucleus is very small, moderately inflated, paucispiral, erect, acutely tapering. The first whorls of the couch are also broadly rounded, but the later whorls are trapezoidal. Traces may be discerned of a microscopically fine but crowded spiral threading, which evanesces about the beginning of the sixth whorl except for two or three faintly impressed lines in front of the anterior suture. The base is grooved with half a dozen feeble sulci; that nearest the periphery is the most deeply impressed.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2564r, 2211r.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

619

Calliostoma rhombotoide Gardner, n. sp.

Calliostoma ceramicum Dall

Plate LX, figures 21, 26-27

Plate LX, figure 34

Shell small, thin, conic, higher than it is wide. Whorls 7 in all. Nucleus very small, smooth and shining, the first half turn bulbous and tilted toward the axis of the shell, the succeeding and final turn of the protoconch also small and not strongly inflated. Line between conch and protoconch sharp, indicated by a change in the texture of the shell and by the initiation of the sculpture. Whorls of conch flattened laterally, the apparent outline of the later whorls modified by the strong spirals. Sculpture plan of 3 symmetrically spaced spirals intercepted and beaded by the strong and regularly spaced retractive incrementals; a fourth spiral introduced on the last whorl of the spire, directly behind the posterior suture; decrease in prominence of the medial of the 3 spirals coincident with the increasing prominence of the fourth spiral, which on the body forms with the outer basal spiral a double keel. Base further sculptured with 4 moderately heavy threads, the second from the peripheral keel less elevated than the others, that nearest the umbilical keel obscurely beaded by the incrementals, which are curved forward toward the periphery. Spiral outlining the umbilicus strongly crenated by the alternate incrementals. Sutures obscure. Aperture rudely quadrate. Outer lip thin, sharp, obtusely angulated at the periphery. Inner lip strongly concave, turned outward and free in the umbilical area. Parietal wall thinly washed with callous. Umbilical pit small but apparently deep.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 3.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498392.
Type locality: No. 10603, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
The unique type is probably a juvenile. The shell is delicate and the wash on the parietal wall so thin that the spirals may be traced through it. However, it indicates the presence of a group that is not otherwise represented in the Shoal Eiver formation and is of further interest because of its apparent similarity to Galliostoma rhombotum Mansfield from the Brasso beds of Trinidad. The Trinidad species is broader relatively, and though the general sculpture plan is the same in both, the anterior spiral is relatively stronger and more finely and sharply beaded than it is in G. rhombotoide, and the basal spirals are finer and all 4 of them sharply beaded. The final whorl is incomplete, but, apparently, in G. rhombotum the umbilicus is closed. It is possible, too, that the adult shell of G. rhombotoide is imperforate.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 10603r.
695462 47 9

1892. Calliostoma (Eutrochus) ceramicum Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 404, pi. 18, fig. 10.
1910. Calliostoma palm&ri Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 32, pi. 8, fig. 4.
Shell elevated-conic, strongly spirally sculptured with one small smooth nuclear and eight subsequent whorls; spiral sculpture of four strong, squarish, revolving ribs, with somewhat narrower channeled interspaces, crossed by numerous deeplyimpressed, evenly-spaced, oblique lines, in harmony with the incremental lines, which produce an effect on the ribs between the intersections analogous to that of tiles on a roof; base with five or six strong spirals of the same sort and two or three smaller ones around the umbilicus; periphery with a single broad smooth spiral, not intersected by the transverse sculpture, and on which the suture is closely laid; umbilicus small, deep, subcylindrical, its marginating riblets forming a projection at the aperture; whorls and base slightly rounded, periphery moderately so; surface polished; aperture roundedquadrate. Alt. of shell 15; max. diam. of base 14 [13.5] mm.
The characters of this fine shell are very distinctive, and it can readily be distinguished from any other of our Tertiary species. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. 113065. Type locality: No. 2212, Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla. Miss Maury's G. palmeri is only half as large as G. ceramicum and seems to be the young of that species. A single young specimen from Oak Grove differs from the Chipola forms in the less elevated spiral sculpture, particularly on the base, and in the less sharply incised axial sulci. It is impossible to determine the relations of this isolated immature individual until further and more mature material is available. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2212r, 2564r.
Section LEIOTROCHUS Conrad
1862. Leiotrochus Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc. for 1862, p. 288.
Type by monotypy: Leiotrochus distans Conrad. Miocene of Maryland (St. Marys formation).
Shell perforate in normal adults* The section is restricted in its distribution to the Shoal Eiver beds. Eutrochus A. Adams, 1863, has been commonly used for the umbilicated group of Gulliostoma,, but the type of Eutrochus is E. perspectwus A. Adams, a Tasmanian species, and, according to Dall, 46 it is synonymous with Astele subcamvwta, Swainson, 1855, also described from Tasmania. Leiotrochus Conrad from the St. Marys formation of Maryland is probably closer to the Floridian species than is the Tasmanian shell, but in Galliostoma, the forms, separated on no grounds other than
16 Dall, W. H., Contributions to the Tertiary paleontology of the Pacific coast, I, The Miocene.*of Astoria and Coos Bay, Oreg.: U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 59, p. 96, 1909.

620 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

the presence or absence of an umbilicus, do not seem to fall into natural divisions. The sculpture of the early whorls seems of greater importance than the umbilical characters in the separation of certain groups. Both Calliostoma rhombotoide and ceramicum are narrowly perforate, but in the ensemble of their characters they seem more closely allied to Calliostoma s. s. than to the section Leiotrochus.
Calliostoma flumenvadnm Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXII, figures 14, 24

suture and simple on the medial, and anterior portions of the body and on the base. The species varies somewhat in the number and elevation of the lirae, but the general aspect of the shell is constant. It is prolific at the Shoal Eiver horizon in Walton County, particularly at the type locality. It has not been recognized elsewhere, but the higher, more strongly sculptured Calliostoma mandnella Olsson from the Gatun formation of Costa Eica may be related.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, localities 3856pr, 3742a, 3731r, 5080r, 5184r, 5195r, 3748r.

Shell nacreous within, rather large, low-turbinate. Whorls 7, including the small, smooth, somewhat bulbous nucleus of only a little more than a single

Calliostoma rugabasis Gardner, n. sp. Plate LXII, figures 28-30

turn. Whorls of spire obliquely flattened laterally, Shell nacreous within, low, broad, shaped like a bee-

increasing rather rapidly in size. Body whorl sharply hive, the profile of the spire scarcely interrupted at the

rounded or obtusely carinate at the periphery, flattened sutures. Whorls 6 to 7, including the small, smooth,

or feebly convex on the base. Sculpture initiated in bulbous protoconch of approximately a turn and a

the form of 3 spiral lirae, the posterior moniliform and half. Spiral sculpture initiated on the first whorl

placed directly in front of the suture, the other two of the conch in the form of 3 sharply elevated,' simple

sharp,and simple, symmetrically spaced between the lirae, which soon become equal in size and symmetrical

posterior lira and the anterior suture; anterior and in spacing between the sutures but which persist for

medial spirals becoming moniliform before the end of only a couple of turns, when they abruptly evanesce;

the second whorl; secondaries intercalated near the remaining volutions smooth except for a faintly im-

beginning } of the fourth whorl between the first and pressed line directly behind the periphery and faint

second and the second and third primaries; a fourth incremental striae. Periphery bicarinate in the young,

primary introduced directly behind the anterior suture; obtusely monocarinate in the adult forms. Suture lines

anterior and medial spirals tending to become simple distinct, feebly impressed. Base smooth near the periph-

near the body, the 1 or 2 posterior spirals alone retain- ery but sharply puckered or corrugated near the um-

ing their beading; spirals further increased in number bilical rib. Aperture subquadrate to transversely

by intercalation and reaching 6 or 7 on the final whorl lenticular in outline. Outer lip sharp, strongly retrac-

of the spire. Sutures impressed, indistinct, outlined tive, obtus'ely angulated at the periphery. Pillar

by the beaded posterior spiral. Body threaded behind strongly arched, heavily reinforced by the apertural

the periphery with 10 or 11 lirae, the posterior 1 or, fa>ee of the umbilical rib. Parietal wall thinly glazed.

2 moniliform, those in front of them simple, tending Umbilicus small but deep, margined by a very broad

to alternate in size, the peripheral spiral the heaviest; and very heavy, commonly rugose costal into which the

base of type sculptured with 2 flattened lirae imme- base of the body is puckered; costa increasingly heavy

diately in front of the periphery, 6 broader, equisized- toward the aperture and terminating in an obscurely

and equispaced fillets between the peripheral and defined tubercle.

umbilical regions and 2 narrow, close-set lirae near the Dimensions of holotype: Height, .12.6 millimeters;

umbilicus. Aperture subquadrate to transversely ellip- maximum diameter, 19.5 millimeters.

tical. Outer lip heavy but sharp-edged, acutely rounded at the periphery. Parietal wall thinly glazed. Columella arched, reinforced, simple. Umbilicus rather large, open, persistent to the apex, scalariform within, margined by a heavy, rugose costa, dissected by the incrementals.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 15.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 22.3' millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351612.
Type locality: No. 3856, 5 to 6 miles west-northwest

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351620.
Type locality: No. 3856, 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.
Calliostoma rugabasis is unique in the low, pyramidal outline, the trilirate sculpture of the two earliest whorls of the conch, the smooth, later volutions, the exceptionally heavy umbilical rib, and the rugose area that margins it.
However, Calliostoma rugabasis is similar in outline and in the sculptural detail of the early whorls to 0.

of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla. t

humilis Conrad ofN the later Chesapeake group (Mio-

Calliostoma ftumenvadwm is characterized by the low, cene) of Maryland and Virginia. C. labrosum from

turbinate outline, the sharp spiral threading, monili- the Chesapeake group of Virginia is a related species,

form on the early whorls and directly in front of the though it is not umbilicate. The group of low, broad

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

621

Calliostoma with trapezoidal whorls, a sculpture which tends to become obsolete on the later volutions, and an umbilicus which may be open or closed is prominent in the Yorktown formation of Virginia and North Carolina. This group has not been, recognized, however, in the Floridian or mid-American Tertiaries. The distribution of the group may be governed by temperature. Other cool-water elements in the Shoal Kiver faunas, such as the Ashtarotha section of Astarte, are not represented in the Chipola fauna nor in the later Floridian and mid-American assemblies.

growth; the whorl between the suture and the first primary

spiral is flattened; in front of the primary it is rounded, the

base is swollen; the umbilicus is large and funicular; the

umbilical carina strong and crenulated, separated from the

base by a well-defined groove; the umbilical walls are coarsely

sculptured by two or three strong and several feebler crenu-

lated ,- spirals separated by excavated sulci; the aperture is

rounded, with a thin edge, crenulated by the exterior sculp-

ture; color markings, in the shape of rather distant, small

purplish spots, still appear on the primary spirals. Alt. of

shell 5.6; max. diam. 6.0 mm.

^

A single specimen of this pretty and very distinct species

was obtained by Mr. Burns. Dall, 1892.

The species is restricted to the Shoal Eiver formation, Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113081.

and although represented at three localities it is not Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry,

abundant at any of them.

Chipola Kiver, Calhoun County, Fla.

Occurrence: Shoal Kiver formation, localities 3856r, The type remains the unique representative of the

3742P, 5195r.

species in the Alum Bluff group.

Subfamily MARGARITnTAE Genus SOIiABIEIfliA Searles Wood
1842. Solariella Searles Wood, Annals and Mag. Nat. History,. vol. 9, p. 531.

Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 2213r.
Solariella laqua Mansfield
Plate LX, figures 28, 29, 38, 36

Type by monotypy: Solariella maculata Searles 1935. Solariella, laqua, Mansfield, Florida Dept. Cons., Geol.

Wood. Crag (Pliocene) of England.

Bull. 12, p. 45, pi. 5, figs. 1-5.

Shell small, subnacreous, depressed turbinate. Volutions not numerous, inflated, commonly tubular. Sculpture dominantly spiral, more or less beaded by the incremental. Aperture subcircular, the axis subparallel to the axis of the shell. Peristome adnate to the body wall between the peripheral and umbilical keels; outer margin of peristome sharp, commonly crenulated by the primary sculpture. Columellar margin strongly concave, simple. Umbilicus usually large and deeply perforate, outlined as a rule by an acute carina. Operculum horny, multispiral.
lAotia, which resembles Solariella in size, outline, and general sculpture plan, has a heavier shell than Solariella, and the operculum is calcareous rather than horny.
Solariella has been reported from all of seas except the Antarctic. A large number of the species are boreal and cool temperate.

. Shell small, turreted, moderately high-spired for the genus and consisting in all of 5% whorls. Earliest turn smooth and rounded with an immersed tip; following whorls nearly flat below the suture, very sharply angled at the posterior shoulder and sculptured with one weakly beaded spiral in front of the suture, a nearly smooth .cord at the posterior shoulder, and 2 smooth cords below, the medial one being a little weaker and situated nearer the basal cord. Another weaker spiral is present above the medial one on some specimens. Base of body whorl with 5 to 7 rather weak and nearly smooth spiral cords. Umbilical cords weakly nodulated, coarser than the basal cords, and separated by rather wide intervals. Aside from the stronger spirals, the whole shell is overrun with microscopic spirals. Retractive axial growth structures ornament most of the shell, being more prominent on the tabulated area in front of the suture. Umbilicus large and scalariform. Aperture nearly round; inner lip thin and closely adhering to the body whorl.
The larger'cotype (U.S.N.M. Cat. No. 3T3157) measures: Length, 5.5 mm.; diameter, 7 mm.
The following species, when compared with S. laqua, show

i Solariella tiirritella Dall Plate LX, figure 31

the following differences: S. vaughant, Mansfield, an upper Miocene^ species, has a larger shell and coarser ornamentation; 8. altiuaulca Guppy, a species from the Bowden marl

1882. Solariella turritella Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, ,pt. 2, p. 408, pi. 23, fig. 2.
Shell small, conical, with six whorls; nucleus small, inflated, smooth; next two, whorls reticulated by about four spiral and numerous transverse elevated threads; subsequent whorls with an elevated thread a little in advance of the suture and two at the periphery, the posterior of these the stronger, .beside several rather obscure smaller ones on the base, in addition to which the whole surface is minutely spirally striated; the transverse sculpture consists of numerous minute, narrow riblets, with wider interspaces, directed in harmony with the incremental lines, most elevated just in front of the suture, and by which the posterior primary spiral rib is crenulated, beyond which the riblets are not distinguishable from the lines of

of Jamaica, has a less tabulated area below the suture, more rounded whorls and more spirals on the base; & major (Gardner and Aldrich), an upper Miocene species, though closely related, has more strongly nodulated spirals and weaker umbilical cords; S. lacunella depressa Dall, a living subspecies from Florida and the Antilles, has a lower spire and closerspaced spirals.
Type locality: Station 12046, Vaughan Creek, upper locality, Walton County, Florida.
Occurrence: Upper middle Miocene, Area zone. Type locality (quite common) ; Station 12044, .Bell farm, upper locality, Walton County (rare). Mansfield, 1935.
Two adolescent specimens from Whites Creek, are probably referable to this species. The less elaborate

622 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

sculpture of the Shoal River individuals is due to their immaturity.
Dimensions of figured specimens: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498394, height, 3.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 4.0 millimeters. U. S. Nat. Mus. 498395, height, 3.4 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.9 millimeters.
Locality of figured specimens: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeauua to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 14436r.
Superfamily ZEUGOBRANCHIA Family FISSUBELLIDAE
Genus LTTCAPINELLA. Pilsbry
1890. ,Lucapinel1a Pilsbry, Manual Conchology, vol. 12, pp. 179, 195.
Type by original designation: Clypidella callomarffinata Carpenter. Eecent from Monterey to Magdalena Bay, Lower California.
Fissurellidae with an oblong shell, not sunken in or covered by the mantle, and about as long as the foot; its apex subcentral, wholly removed by a rather large oblong perforation,. which is margined within by an entire (not truncated) callus; edge of shell blunt, scarcely crenulated in adults except in front and behind; sculptured with scaly riblets; front and side margins level, posterior margin a little elevated. Pilsbry. 1890.
The genus is restricted in its geologic distribution to the Tertiary and Quaternary and in its geographic distribution to the American shores.
In the Alum Bluff group the family is recorded only in the Chipola .formation.
Lucapinella limatula (Reeve)
Plate LXI1, figure 15
1850. Fissurella limatula Reeve, Conchologia Iconica, vol. 6, Fissurella; sp. and fig. 115.
1889. Fissurellidea limatula Reeve. Dall, Harvard Coll. Mus. Comp. Zool. Bull. 18, p. 409.
1890. Lucapinella lima,tula Reeve. Pilsbry, Manual of conchology, vol. 12, p. 198, pi. 36, fig. 13, pi. 61, figs. 6-9.
1892. Lucapinella limatula Reeve. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 423.
1910. Lucapinella Comelliana Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 32, pi. 8, fig. 5.
Shell oblong-ovate, somewhat attenuated anteriorly, sides a little compressed, radiately finely and closely prickly striated, orifice large, ovate; white, stained and variegated with pale black.
Hab ? A depressed shell, finely prickly striated over its surface. Reeve, 1850.
The species is characterized by its depressed, more or less spatulate shell, suggesting in outline a duck's, bill, its foramen elongated in some individuals to almost one-third the total height, and the prominent con-

centric lamellae with their free edges minutely spinose at the intersection with the radials. The primary radials are 16 in number on the figured specimen; secondaries and tertiaries are intercalated. The sculpture, botli the concentric and radial, is less prominent laterally than it is toward the anterior and, particularly, toward the posterior extremity. The radials are less crowded, too, on the sides of the shell ; than they are toward the ends. The inner margin of the foraminal opening is rather broadly banded with a heavy callus that conforms in outline to the opening.
Dimensioiis of figured specimen: Height, 3.0 millimeters ; length, 14.0 millimeters; maximum width, 8.0 millimeters; length of foramen, 3.0 millimeters.
Figured specimen: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 53881. Locality of figured specimen: Recent off Key West on grass at low water. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213r, 3419r. Outside occurrence: Pliocene Waccamaw formation, North Carolina; Caloosahatchee formation, Florida. Eecent: Cape Fear, N. C., to the Barbadoes in 15 to 20 fathoms.
Genus DIODORA Gray
1821. Diodora Gray, London Medical Repository Monthly Jour. and Rev., vol. 15, p. 233. '
1915. Diodora Gray. Iredale, Malac. Soc. London Proc., vol. 11, p. 331.
Type by monotypy: Patella apertura Mont[agu] = Patella graeca Linnaeus juvenis (Fide Iredale). Eecent off the coast of southern England and the Channel Islands, and, according to some authors, south into the Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas.
Ovate conic limpetlike shells, the base level or slightly raised laterally. Basal outline ovate or ellipsoidal. Nucleus spiral, present only in the juveniles, in which it caps the imperforate subcentral apex; later absorbed and succeeded by an ovate or keyhole perforation which migrates a part of the distance down the anterior slope. Sculpture radial or reticulate. Inner margins crenate in the type, reflecting the radial sculpture. Apical perforation set high on anterior slope, rather narrow and not conspicuously elongated, reinforced within and banded with a heavy but rather narrow callus truncate posteriorly; shell depressed behind the truncated callus. Muscle scar horseshoe-shaped, confined to posterior and lateral portions of shell.
The group is prominent in the Tertiary and Eecent
faunas. Radials alternating in size in the adult, rarely exceeding 50 in
number: Sculpture relatively strong..... .Diodora chipolana (Dall). Sculpture rather low and flat............................ Diodora daidala Gardner, n. sp.
Radials alternating in size in the young, subequal in the adult, usually exceeding 50 in number............................ Diodora pumpellyi Gardner, n. sp.

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

623

Diodora chipolana (Dall)
Plate LXII, figure 13
1892. Fissuridea chipolana Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans. vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 426.
1898. Fissuridea chipolana Dall, idem, pt. 4, p. 918, pi. 23, fig. 21.
1915. Fissuridea chipolana Dall, IT. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 90, p. 114. 1937. Diodora chipolana (Dall). Mansfield, Florida Dept.
Cons., Geol. Bull. 15, p. 186.
Shell ovate, slightly wider behind the foramen, with rather straight sides, slightly concave anterior and convex posterior slope; foramen oval or a little keyhole-shaped, sloping forward; sculpture of narrow, prominent, radiating rounded ribs, with wider interspaces and alternately smaller intercalary riblets, crossed by distant, regularly spaced, elevated concentric threads, which form nodules at the intersections; these nodules toward the periphery tend to become transversely flattened or pearshaped, and in large specimens near the margin may assume an imbricated form; interior smooth, the margin crenulate in the young, in the full-grown rather sharply and coarsely denticulate radially; foraminal callus spade-shaped, slightly dinted behind. Alt. 7; Ion. 15; diam. 9.5 mm.
This species much resembles F. alternata Say, but seems more depressed and ejongated, and has the foramen habitually more anterior. It does not seem to attain so large a size as the recent specimens of alternata. It is undoubtedly the forerunner of that species. Dall, 1892.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112699. Type locality: No. 2213,1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County., Fla. Diodbra daidala Gardner from the Shoal Kiver formation, is more finely sculptured and both the radials and the concentric lirae are more flat than they are in D. chipolana. Diodora pumpellyi is relatively higher than the Chipola species; thie radials are subequal in the adult, linearly spaced, and may be as many as 80; the foraminal opening is smaller. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 7257r, 2213C, 2564r, 2211*; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646r. Outside occurrence: Miocene Tampa silex beds at Ballast Point; Yorktown formation, Eock Landing?, Craven County, N. C.; Duplin marl, Natural Well?, Duplin County, N. C.
Diodora daidala Gardner, new species
Plate LXII, figure 26
Shell rather thin, of moderate dimensions, not very high. Basal outline ovate, broadening posteriorly, slightly upcurved laterally. Apical perforation elliptical,, relatively broad, set obliquely on the anterior slope; its posterior rim nearly central. Eim reinforced, narrowly banded within by a heavy callus, uniform in width and following the outline of the perforation anteriorly and laterally but truncate behind. Shell depressed behind the truncation. Eadial sculpture dominant, the radials crowded, separated by linear interspaces, arranged in a series of not very sharply defined

primaries, secbndaries and tertiaries, the primaries and secondaries, originating at the foramen, the tertiaries commonly introduced a little later. Eadials overridden by crowded concentric lirae, regular in size and spacing, not spinose nor scaly but rather flat. Inner margins feebly crenate in harmony with the radials. Muscle scar obscure, taking the form of a narrow band about midway between the apical opening and the basal margin, confined to the posterior and medial portions of the shell, the extremities apparently in line with the foraminal callus.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 7.9 millimeters; length, 18 millimeters; width, 12 millimeters.
Holotype and 1 paratype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498397.
Type locality: No. 14436. Gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. Collection made by the Geological Survey of the State of Florida and presented to the United States Geological Survey.
Diodora daidala is related closely to Diodora chipolana Dall. The shell seems to run larger, and the primary sculpture does not stand out above the secondary as it does in D. chipolana. The concentric lirae, too, are more crowded in D. daidala and are not spinose or scaly at the intersections with the overridden radials. The sculpture plan in D. daidala is similar to that of the Recent D. alternata (Say), but alternata is a larger, coarser, and more elevated shell, with a stronger concentric sculpture. Diodora redimicula (Say) and D. catilliformis (Eogers), widespread in the upper Miocene of the middle Atlantic seaboard are also similar in general sculpture but they, too, are much larger and coarser than D. daidala.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 14436r.
Diodora pumpellyi Gardner, new species
Plate LXII, figures 25, 27
Shell rather small for the group, moderately elevated, conic; the posterior slope a little more produced and consequently not so steep as the anterior; lateral slopes oblique, steeper than the anterior. Base ovate, little or not at all upcurved medially. Eadials well elevated, well-rounded cords, alternating in size in the young, subequal in the adults, separated by linear interspaces, not far from 80 in number. Concentric sculpture finely laminar, closely spaced, overriding the radials; the interspaces between the radials and concentric laminae appearing, especially in the worn shells, as a series of minute pits. Foramen rather small, elongate, oval, slightly oblique to the axis. Interior concealed by the matrix.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 7.4 millimeters;

624 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

length of base, 12.5 millimeters; maximum width of base, 8.8 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371889. Type locality: No'. 7148, Gastropod Gulch, 5% miles southeast of Bainbridge, Decatur County, Ga. Diodora pumpellyi is higher relatively than D. cMpolana Ball, and the sides are less inclined to be upcurved. The radials are more numerous and more closely spaced than in the Chipola species; they are more nearly equal than in either D. chipolana or D. daidala. Diodora pumpellyi is not uncommon in the Alum Bluff group of Decatur County, Gav an area which Raphael Pumpelly was among the first to critically investigate. Occurrence: Oak Grove sand, localities 3386r, 3385P, 7148r, 3396r.
Genus BIMtJItA Defiance
1827. Rimula Defrance, Dictionnaire des Sciences naturelles, vol. 45, p. 471.
Type by subsequent designation (Gray, Zool. Soc. London Proc., pt. 15, p. 147, 1847) : Rimula WainvilW Defrance. "Calcaire grossier de Hauteville, departement de la Manche," France. Defrance, 1827.
Shell small, thin, ovate-conic. Apex imperforate, usually within the posterior third; posteriorly directed, incurved. Nucleus small, smooth, paucispiral. Anal opening a slit on the median line of the anterior slbpe, enclosed within the basal margin, migrating with the growth of the shell, the traces of the successive openings clearly retained on the sinus, which is continuous from the apex to the slit. Surface cancellate.
Rimula woodringi Gardner, n. sp.

quite so wide as the radials, equal and regularly spaced, more crowded in the apical region than they are toward the base. Margin finely serrate in harmony with the radials. Foraminal groove gracefully contoured, broadly arched, regularly corrugated from the apex to the slit, each lamina indicating a fdrmer posterior extremity of the foramen. Slit as wide as the groove and about one-third its length. Distance from the anterior extremity of the foramen to the basal margin not so long as the foramen. Opening feebly reinforced within.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 1.3 millimeters; length of base, 2.7 millimeters; maximum width of base, 1.9 millimeters.
Holotype: In the collection made by T. H. Aldrich and later acquired by Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore. Deposited, at present, in the U. S. National Museum.
Woodring referred to this species in a discussion of Rimuila pilsbryi Woodring from the Bowden of Jamaica and noted that the Bowden species was larger and more heavily sculptured than the CMpola form.
Rimula woodringi is the possible ancestor of Rimula caroliniana Dall of the Pliocene of North Carolina. The Waccamaw species is not so flattened dorsally as the species from the Chipola formation, and the sculpture is sharper and more open. The foraminal opening is not so near the anterior margin in R. caroliniqna, nor is the foraminal groove so closely and so regularly laminated. I have the pleasure of naming this unusually interesting species in honor of Dr. Wendell P. Woodring, whose work on the Bowden fauna in the late 1920's is still the latest and finest.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, locality 10288r, Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University.

Plate LXII, figures 16, 17
1928. Rimula species, Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 385, p. 456.
Shell very small and delicate, semielliptical. Basal margin elliptical, level. Apex directed backward and within the posterior fourth. Posterior slope consequently very short, concave. Anterior slope broadly and smoothly convex. Sides oblique, evenly diverging toward the base. Protoconch minute, smooth, shining, curved backward; coiled in a single plane, the 1% volutions visible on the right side when the anterior extremity is faced away from the observer. Close of protoconch indicated by a change in the texture of the shell and by the appearance of a feeble radial sculpture. Surface of conch finely cancellated; the interspaces between the radials and the concentric sculpture appearing as minute, squarish pits, which give a slightly punctate aspect to the sculpture. About 40 rather low, broadly rounded radials, a little wider and less closely spaced anteriorly. Concentric lirae not

Class SCAPHOPODA
family DENTALUDAE
Genus DENTAUUM Linnaeus
1758. Dentaliwn Linnaeus, Systema Naturae, 10th ed., p. 785. 1897. Dentalium Linnaeus. Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of
conchology, vol. 17, p. xxix. 1920. Detttalium Linnaeus. Henderson, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull.
Ill, p. 8.
Type by subsequent designation (Schmidt, Chr. Fr., Versuch tiber die beste Einrichtung zur Aufstellung, Behandlimg u. Aufbewahrung der verschiedene Naturkorper u. Gegenstande der Kunst, vorziiglich der Conchyliensammlungen; nebst kurzer Beurtheilung der conchyliologischen Systeme u. Schriften, u. einer tabellarische Zusammenstellung u. Vergleichung der, sechs besten u. neuesten conchyliologischen Systeme; nebst einem Verzeichniss der am meisten bekannten Conchylien, wie solche nach dem Lamarkschen Systeme geordnet- werden konnen, pp. 151, 178, 181, 1818) :

CTBNOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOB^IANCHIA, AND SCAPHOPODA

625

DentaUum elephantinum Linnaeus. Recent off Amboyna and the Philippine Islands.
Shell a curved and tapering tube, the diameter greatest at the aperture. Embryonic whorls minute, fragile, and lost at an early growth stage. A longitudinal sculpture usually developed, at least near the posterior extremity; shell smooth or merely annulated in a few of the smaller subgenera. Apical opening usually modified by a slit or«notch due to absorption and in no way analogous to similar modifications in the gastropod apertures. Anterior opening circular or oblique, commonly modified by the longitudinal ribbing.
The shell varies in size from minute needlelike forms to those of 4 or, 5 inches in length, in thickness from fragile to

heavy and solid; in texture from soft and chalky to hard porcel: lanous or glassy; in color from occasional greenish, reddish, or yellowish species to pure white, the latter greatly predominating. The shells may be transparent, translucent to opaque, dull lusterless to the most highly polished and glistening surface. Henderson, 1920.
DentaUum has been adequately monographed both by Pilsbry and Sharp and by Henderson, and their classifications are followed in this report.
The distribution of DentaUum in the Alum Bluff group is interesting in that out of the six species listed all but one occurs in the Chipola formation. DentaUum chipolanum and D. schumoi, the two most abundant species in the Chipola, are apparently restricted to it.

Axial sculpture developed at least on the posterior part of the shell; evanescent .medially or anteriorly: Axials sharply defined though npt conspicuously elevated. ................. .DentaUum (Antalis) cMpolanum GaYdner, n. sp. Axials threadlike, irregular in arrangement................ ................... DentaUum (AntaUs) diopon Gardner, n. sp. Axial sculpture developed only at the extreme tip, exceedingly fine. . ..'........... .DentaUum (Graptacme) eboreum Conrad.
Axial sculpture not developed even on the posterior part of the shell: Shell laterally compressed, minutely annulated posteriorly. ..................... .DentaUum (Bpisiphon) schumoi (Pilsbry). Shell cylindrical, not annulated ................................... .DentaUum (Laevidentalium,) santarosanum Maury.

Subgenus AJSTTAUS H. and A. Adams

1854. Antalis H. and A. Adams, Genera of Recent Mollusca, vol. 1, p. 457.
1897. Antalis H. and A. Adams. Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of Conchology, vol. 17, p. 37.
1920. Antalis H. and A. Adams. Henderson, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. Ill, p. 34.

Type by subsequent designation (Pilsbry and Sharp, idem, 1897): DentaUum entalis Linnaeus. Recent in the North Atlantic and south to Spain.

Tip prismatic or round, with primary riblets ranging from

6 to 18, which are less strongly developed and prominent than

in DentaUum s. s. and generally disappear in the senescent

stages of the shell if not earlier. The apical characters consist

of a notch on the convex side or may be lacking. Transverse

sculpture is variable or absent.

'

As already noted, the differences between this and the pre-

ceding subgenus [DentaUum s. s.] are not very sharply drawn.

* * * The American species referred here are all less strongly

ribbed than are those included under DentaUum s. s. Hender-

son, 1920.

Dentalium (Antalis) chipolanum_ Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXII, figures 18, 18a
1892. Dentalium disparile D'Orbigny. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 440 (in part).
Not Dentalium disparile D'Orbigny, 1853.
Shell polished but not highly, moderately long but very slender, gently arched medially, less feebly so posteriorly. Young acicular and rather strongly arcuate. Axial sculpture at the posterior extremity of the slightly imperfect holotype of 12 (6 in the earliest growth stage) equisized, narrow, costae a little more closely spaced on the ventral surface than on the dorsal;

intercalaries admitted midway between the primaries at a distance varying greatly with the individual; secondaries rapidly increasing in prominence until they equal the primaries; sculpture on the medial portion of the tube consisting of approximately 24 subequal lirae separated by linear interspaces. Axials abruptly evanescent anteriorly, leaving the tube destitute of ornamentation. Intercostal areas on the posterior portion of the shell finely striated by the growth lines. Posterior orifice slightly oval due to the greater thickening of the shell on the dorsal and lateral surfaces. Medial section subcircular, finely stellated externally by the axials. Peristome circular, very thin, and slightly oblique to the axis of the shell.
Dimensions of holotype: Length, 40 millimeters; maximum diameter, 3.3 millimeters.
Holotype: XT. S^Nat. Mus. No. 329137.
Type locality: No. 3419, McClelland farm, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Pla.
Dentalium ehipolamvm seems to be a forerunner "in the group of the Recent D. disparile D'Orbigny, and probably the references of Chipola species in the various check lists to D. disparile should be transferred to D. chipolanum. The curvature toward the apical extremity is higher and the lag in the change in sculpture pattern greater in the Recent species. In D. chipolanum, the hexagonal sculpture is confined to the extreme tip and the longitudinal cording evanesces in many individuals midway from the apex. In D. disparile, the hexagonal sculpture commonly persists through the posterior fourth or third of the entire length and the longitudinal cording to the peristome. In D. te&asianum Philippi, the secondary sculpture is absent or fortuitous, and the hexagonal sculpture

626 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

fades directly into the simple, incrementally roughened tube; only at the extremities is there any close resemblance to D. chipolanum.
A few tips from the marls of the Shoal Kiver formation south of De Funiak Springs exhibit the characteristic hexagonal outline of D. disparile.
D. chipolanum is represented in the Chipola by abundant but fragmentary material. It shows wide variation in the prominence of the axials and in the time of appearance of the secondaries.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 2213a, 2564a, 3419a, 2211?, 7183r.
Dentalium (Antalis) diopon Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXII, figures 23, 23a
Tube rather highly polished, thin, of moderate diameter ; curvature very low. Earliest growth stages probably not preserved. Ten threadlike ribs at tip of incomplete figured specimen, the number, however, apparently inconstant; number increased by intercalaries, but all axial sculpture becoming obsolete in fully adult and senescent stages. Growth sculpture strong, in some individuals sufficiently strong to cancellate the axial filaments. Characters of apical extremity not preserved. Peristome circular.
Dimensions of cotypes: Length, estimated from broken specimens, 45 to 50 millimeters; diameter of posterior extremity of incomplete adolescent, 1.1 millimeters ; diameter of anterior extremity of shqrt length of adult, 3.3 millimeters.
Cotypes, an incomplete adolescent and an incomplete adult: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498398.
Type locality: No. 3856, 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.
Dentalium diopon is a larger, thicker, more gently arcuate shell than D. chipolanum. It is more finely sculptured posteriorly and the sculpture is more rapidly evanescent. The relationship between the two species is probably not close. In its thickness and low curvature D. diopon recalls D. dissimile Guppy of the Bowden fauna, but the initial primaries of the Jamaican species number only 4, and the quadrate outline is retained into the adolescent stage.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856a, 3742C, 3748P.
Subgenus GBAPTACME Pilsbry and Sharp
1897. Graptacme Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of conchology, vol. 17, p. 85.
Type by subsequent designation (Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington, Pub. 366, p. 201, 1925) : Dentalinm eboreum Conrad. Cape Hatteras to Sarasota, Fla.
Surface sculptured with close, fine, deeply engraved longitudinal striae near the apex, the remainder smooth; or rarely the striae persist half or all the length. Moderate sized or

small species, cylindrical in section, and white or nearly so. Distribution: Antillean and Panamic regions; Indo-Pacific;
mainly living in quite moderate depths. . There is remarkable diversity in the characters of the apices in this apparently very natural group. Pilsbry and Sharp, 1897.
Dentalium (Graptacme) eboreum Conrad
1846. Dentalium eboreum Conrad, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., vol. 3, p. 27.
1885. Dentalium leptum Bush, Connecticut Acad. Arts and Sci. Trans., vol. 6, p. 470, pi. 45, figs. 18, 18a.
1889. Dentalium matara Dall, Harvard Coll. Mus. Comp. Zoology Bull., vol. 18, p. 420.
1892. Dentalium leptum Bush. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 440.
1897. Dentalium eboreum Conrad. Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of Conchology, vol. 17, p. 89, pi. 16, figs. 47-49, 55, 56.
1897. Dentalium leptum Bush. Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of Conchology, vol. 17, p. 89, pi. 16, fig. 50.
1897. Dentalium matara Dall. Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of Conchology, vol. 17, p. 105, pi. 18, figs. 14-18.
1920. Dentalium (Graptacme) eboreum Conrad. Henderson, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. Ill, p. 66, pi. 10, figs. 3-5, 8, 9; pi. 11, fig. -6.
The shell is regularly, moderately curved, slender, thin but strong, with a long, slightly arched tip. The color is a salmon pink, sometimes yellowish, generally fading to white, first on the anterior portion, then finally over the entire shell in all but fresh specimens. The surface is highly polished, shining arid vitreous, though often variegated with milky, less translucent patches. The sculpture is confined to the tip only and consists of about 20 very fine raised longitudinal lines, visible only under a lens; all the balance of the shell is perfectly smooth save for slight growth irregularities. There is a rather deep, narrow apical notch on the convex side. In old specimens where the tip has been lost a projecting thin sheath of the inner shell layer from the posterior aperture is frequently developed, and in this case the apical slit is preserved and reproduced in the protruding sheath, and it is sometimes even repeated, though in lesser degree, on the concave side as well. Average specimens measure length, from 25 to 35 mm.; diameter, 2.5 mm.; with an arc of 2. An adult specimen of large size with tip intact would measure about length, 62-65 mm.; diameter, 3 mm.; with an arc of 3.5 to 4.
The type of Dentalium eboreum is in the collection of the Philadelphia Academy of Sciences; topotypes in museum collection, Cat. No. 152957, U.S.N.M., are from Sarasota Pass, Florida.
The type of Dentalium leptum, Cat. No. 41562, U.S.N.M., are from off Hatteras, in 16 fathoms, from the U. S. B. F. Station 2276; bottom of gray sand and broken shells.
The type of DentaUum matara, Cat. No. 95363, U.S.N.M., off Cape Lookout, in 31 fathoms, bottom of black sand and broken shells, from the U. S. B. F. Station 2611.
In the National Museum collection are many lots from off Cape Hatteras, Beaufort, Cape Lookout, from the Florida eastcoast region in shallow water, 6 to.49 fathoms; from the Florida Keys region, 18 to 50 fathoms; west coast of Florida shore stations to 111 fathoms; also from San Juan, Porto Rico, and Barbados.
A lot from Samana Bay, consisting mostly of fragments, are not typical, being more strongly curved.
Conrad's Dentalium, eboreum seems to have been overlooked until redescribed by Pilsbry and Sharp in 1897. Conrad's speci-

CTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHIA. AND SCAPHOPQDA

627

mens showed no notch. We now know the absence of apical characters to be of frequent occurrence in many of the Dentalia. On account of its insufficient description, Miss Bush evidently discarded Conrad's species when determining the status of her own D. leptum.
Practically all large, fully adult or senile specimens lose the entire tip, leaving a perfectly smooth, highly polished sculptureless shell. This is Dall's Dentalium matara. I have only been willing to unite these three species after a most critical examination of many lots, and I do not believe them to be separable even subspecifically. Henderson, 1920.
The species is well characterized by the exceedingly fine axial sculpture restricted to the posterior portion of the shell. DeniaUum chipolunum, the only other Alum Bluff form in which the sculpture evanesces before reaching the aperture, is much larger and stouter and more coarsely sculptured.
It is difficult to discriminate the short lengths of the anterior portions of the tubes of Dentalium eboeum, D. santarosanum and D. schumoi. None of them are axially sculptured near the anterior extremity of the adult shell. In general, DentaUum eborewm is a thicker, less polished shell than either of the other two, D. santarosanum is less slender in outline than D. schumoi, but very thin, polished, and commonly with obscure growth wrinkles. Dentaliwn, schumoi is exceedingly slender and needlelike, more minute than either of the other two and more highly polished.
D. eboreum has been recognized both in the Chipola and the Oak Grove but is not abundant in either formation.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213p, 7151r ; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646?.
Snbgenns EPISIPHON Pilsbry and Sharp
1897. Episiphon Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of conchology, vol. 17, p. 117.
Type by subsequent designation (Suter, Manual of New Zealand Mollusca, p. 821, 1913) : DentaMum sowerbyi Guilding. Recent from Cape Hatteras to the Gulf of Mexico and the West Indies, 8 to 124 fathoms (fide Johnson).
Small, very slender; rather straight shells, needle-shaped or truncated, slightly tapering, thin and fragile, glossy and smooth or at least without longitudinal sculpture; apex with a projecting pipe or a simple orifice; no slit, rarely a notch.
Inhabitants of moderately or very deep water in the Mediterranean, Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico, and Pacific. Pilsbry and Sharp, 1897.
Dentalium (Episiphon) schumoi Pilsbry
1892. Dentalium filum Sowerby. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pi 2, p. 441 (in part).
Not Dentalium filum Sowerby, 1860. 1911. Dentalium (Episiphon) schumoi Pilsbry, Acad. Nat. Sci.
Philadelphia Proc., p. 167, text fig. 5. 1925. DentaUum (Episiphon)- schumoi Pilsbry. Woodring,
Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 366, p. 203, pi. 27, figs. 21-23.

Shell small, slightly curved, excessively slender, the adults but slightly tapering, young shells acicular; rather thin ; surface finely striated circularly, becoming on the posterior half strongly annulated by rather regularly spaced, close grooves, slightly oblique, and cutting the surface into narrow segments much as in D. (Fustiaria) circmatum. Tube strongly compressed laterally throughout; apex simple or with a short projecting pipe or tube.
Length 8.2, antero-posterior diameter at aperture 0.78, at apex 0.56 mm.; lateral diam. at aperture 0.6, at apex 0.46 mm. The specimen has evidently lost in length by breakage.
Bowden bed, not uncommon. Strongly compressed laterally, and readily distinguished by the circular sculpture. It is named in honor of Mr. Silas L. Schumo, who collected the material. Pilsbry, 1911.
Type locality: Bowden, Jamaica. The characteristic annulations of the Florida and West Indian species and the conspicuous lateral compression are wanting on the recent D. filum of Sowerby, which is a very slender and fragile little tube, circular in cross section and smooth except for exceedingly faint growth lines. Sowerby's figured specimen, presumably the type, is from Gibralter. The recent Caribbean species, D. sowerbyi Guilding, is also similar to D. schumoi but less uniformly annulated posteriorly. The small, highly polished Dentalium schumoi is far from rare in the Chipola fauna, and on a few of the specimens, the diagnostic pipe has been preserved. The species' has not been reported from either of the other two Alum Bluff horizons. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r, 7257r, 2213a, 2564?, 3419?, 7151C. Outside occurrence: Bowden formation of Jamaica.
Subgenus LAEVIDENTAIfHTM Cossmann
1888. Laevidentalium Cossmann, Catalogue illustre des Coquilles fossiles de I'fioeSne des environs de Paris, fasc. 3, p. 11.
1897. Laevidentalium Cossmann, s. lat Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of conchology, vol. 17, p. 97.
Type by original designation: DentaUum incertum Deshayes. Calcaire grossier of the Paris Basin.
Cossmann cited as diagnostic characters of the subgenus the oval cross section of the shell, the absence of longitudinal sculpture, and the truncated, unnotched apical opening.
Pilsbry and Sharp extended the limits imposed by Cossmann to include some forms with a circular cross section and some notched at the apical opening.
Dentalium (Laevidentalium) santarosanum Maury
1873. Dentalium Haytensisf Gabb,,Am. Philos. Soc. Trans., vol. 15, p. 244.
1897. Dentalium haytense? Gabb. Pilsbry and Sharp, Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia Proc., p. 471, pi. 11, figs. 8, 9.
1910. Dentalium santarosanum Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 33, pi. 8, fig. 6.
Shell small, nearly straight, increasing very gradually in size, surface polished. Gabb, 1873.
Type locality: Santo Domingo.

628 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Known only by fragments, the largest of which is probably one-half the original length. These indicate an almost straight, rather rapidly tapering but slender shell, circular or nearly so in section, with smooth, polished surface; growth-wrinkles light, rather irregular, running somewhat obliquely around the tube; and there is an occasional constriction so slight as to be hardly mentionable. No trace of longitudinal sculpture. Shell moderately thick {as shown by the section, fig. 8>, but becoming very thin at the aperture. Apex unknown.
Length of type (broken at both ends), 9.4 diam. at larger end 1.28 X 1.35, at smaller end 0.68 mm. Pilsbry and Sharp, 1897.
Shell rather thin, small, so slightly curved as to appear at first sight straight; smooth; more or less shining; without sculpture; lines of growth very faintly visible, cross section of shell circular.
Length of largest specimen 7; greatest diameter 1.5 mm. Oak Grove, Santa Rosa County, Fla. Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
Bather abundant fragments have been found of a species that resembles haytense in the smooth, highly polished external surface, the very gradually tapering outline, circular or nearly circular cross section, and the somewhat oblique incremental striae. It also exhibits a feeble and obscure concentric undulation, due doubtless to irregularities of growth and suggested in the description of haytense by P*ilsbry and Sharp. The fragment described by Miss Maury under the name of santarosanum seems to present no characters .specifically distinct from those of the Haitian species.
Dentalium sanatarosanum is less minute and less slender than Dentalium eboreum and lacks the fine posterior annulation.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities, 10609r, 2213P, 2564r, 3419r ; Oak Grove sand, locality 2646C.
Family SIPHONODENTAIJXDAE Genus CADULTJS Philippi
1844. Cadutus Philippi, Enumeratio Molluscorum Siciliae, vol. 2, p. 209.
Type by monotypy: Dentalium owtlum Philippi. Recent in the Mediterranean.
Shell tubular, more or less inflated medially or anteriorly and contracted near the aperture. Maximum diameter may be sharply defined by the so-called cingulum. Outline somewhat arcuate, especially along the outer, convex, or ventral margin and toward the posterior extremity. External surface without color in the Recent shells, usually polished; smooth or faintly scratched incrementally. Posterior orifice simple or cut into 2 or 4 lobes. Anterior orifice circular, oval, or ovate, usually oblique to the axis.
The genotype and the other members of Cadulus s. s. are stout, bulging, cask-shaped little tubes, as the name Cadulus indicates. The restricted genus has been recognized in the mid-American but not in the Alum Bluff group of Florida.
The genus, though of more modern origin than Dentalium s. lat., is recorded in the Cretaceous. The Re-

cent species number about 70 and are rather abundantly represented in the warmer waters.
Subgenus POLYSCHIDES Pilsbry and Sharp
1898. Potyschides Pilsbry and Sharp, Manual of conchology, vol. 17, p. 146.
Type by original designation: Siphodentalium tetraschistum Watson. Off Fernando Noronha in 25 fathoms (Challenger Expedition).
Shell inflated above the middle or not much bulging; apex cut into a number of lobes, generally four, 'by as many slits. Pilsbry and Sharp, 1898.
Cadulus (Polyschides) lobion Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXII, figure 21
1892. Cadulus vicksbwgensis Meyer. Dall, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 444 (partim).
Not Cadulus vickxburgensis Meyer, 1886.
Shell very small, rather thin, lustrous, the dorsal margin nearly straight medially and anteriorly, feebly arcuate posteriorly; the ventral margin more strongly arcuate, the maximum curvature a little in front of the middle. No defined cingulum. Posterior extremity 4-lobed, the nicks shallow and V-shaped, evenly scalloping the small circular aperture. Anterior extremity slightly compressed dorsoventrally, oblique, the dorsal margin produced slightly beyond the ventral/
Dimensions of holotype: Length, 4.8 millimeters; maximum diameter, 0.9 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498411. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla. Cadulus lobion, appears in many of the collections and check lists under the name of Cadulus wcksburgensis Meyer. In the Oligocene species the cingulum is much more sharply defined, and the posterior slits apparently deeper. The curvature of C. lobion is very gentle and uniform, more so than in either C. mcksburgensis or in the Oak Grove species C. clarae. In well-preserved material, C. clarae Maury may be discriminated not only by the cingulum but, more significantly, by the nondentate posterior opening. Cadulus portoricensis Henderson is a somewhat similar shell and 4-lobed, but tapers more gradually than the Chipola species. Cadulus tetrodon Pilsbry and Sharp, Recent from Frying Pan Shoals to the Bahamas in 2 to 85 fathoms (fide Johnson), is also similar in form, but it is a thinner, more delicate shell than the Chipola species and apparently is more deeply dentate posteriorly. Cadulus carolmensis Bush, also 4lobed posteriorly and common in the Recent seas from Hatteras to the Keys and the Gulf of Mexico in 3 to 63 fathoms, is larger and more bulging anteriorly. Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 10609r? 7257P, 2213a, 2564C, 3419», 7151&, 22HC.

OTENOBRANCHIA (REMAINDER), ASPIDOBRANCHlA, AND SCAPHOPODA

629

Subgeous OADILA Gray

Cadulus (Gadila?) volvulus Gardner, n. sp.

1847. Gadila Gray, Zool. Soc. London, Proc., pt. 15, p. 159.

Plate LXII, figure 22

Type by original designation: Dentalium gadus Montagu. "In many parts of the British Channel" (Montagu).
Gadila exhibits the toothlike outline of many of the species of Polyscfaides, but the margin of the apical orifice is simple and unslit.
Cadulus (Gadila) clarae Maury
Plate LXII, figure 20
1910. Cadulus clarae Maury, Bull. Am. Paleontology, vol. 4, no. 21, p. 33, pi. 8, fig. 7.
Shell slender, small, curved; cingulum more or less differentiated, varying with individuals; cross section of shell elliptical.
Length of shell 5; greatest diameter 1 mm. Oak Grove, Florida. Mr. Aldrich's collection. Maury, 1910.
Shell small, smooth, highly polished, gently arched, feebly, compressed dorsoventrally, moderately inflated, the cingulum rather well differentiated and placed a little in front of the median line. Tube very gradually tapering behind the cingulum until it approaches the posterior extremity, where both the contraction and the arching are higher. Anterior contraction gradual and not very great. Posterior orifice simple, circular in outline. Anterior^ ovate and slightly oblique to the axis of the shell, the dorsal margin a little more produced than the ventral.
Dimensions of figured topotype: Height, 4.9 millimeters; maximum diameter, 0.9 millimeters; minimum diameter, 0.3 millimeters; maximum diameter of aperture, 0.7 millimeters;, minimum diameter of aperture, 0.5 millimeters.
Figured topotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350513.
Type locality: No. 2646, Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.
Cadulus clarae suggests the Vicksburg species 0. quadriturritus Meyer, but it has a more pronounced cingulum and is more arculate posteriorly. The posterior orifice is' apparently simple, for out of a very large number of species none has been observed which shows any trace of denticulation. Cadulus lobion from the same locality is much more slender and more attentuated posteriorly.
It is the only Cadulus reported from the Oak Grove sand and is restricted in its known distribution to that formation.
Occurrences: Oak grove sand, localities 2646pr, 5632a, 5631P, 5633?, 7054C, 10659r.

1892. Cadulu* newtonensit Meyer and Aldrich. ball, Wagner Free Inst. Sci. Trans., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 444 (in part).
Not Cadulus newtonensis Meyer and Aldrich, 1886.
Shell small, slender, polished? well-rounded, less gently curved near the posterior end than medially or anteriorly. Inner surface almost straight except in the posterior third. Cingulum not defined. Anterior half of tube approximately uniform in diameter except for the dorsoventral compression near the aperture. Posterior orifice circular, the characters obscure, the margin possibly cut into four subequal, exceedingly shallow lobes. Margin of aperture very thin, nearly circular, set at a low angle to the axis of the shell, the dorsal surface a little more produced than the ventral.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 8.6 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.1 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112754. Type locality: No. 2213, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola Eiver, Calhoun County, Fla.
Cadulus volvulus runs rather consistently smaller than C. jacksonensis Meyer of the upper Eocene and is a little less compressed dorsoventrally. It may also be related to the Eecent species C. quadridentatus Ball, which occurs in the North Atlantic in 2 to 52 fathoms from Cape Hatteras to the Florida Keys and the Gulf, but it is a little more slender, less compressed at the aperture, and less deeply or not at all dentate posteriorly. From the coexistent species C. lobion it is separated by its greater height, more slender outline, and more attenuated posterior portion. C. spiniformis is more attenuated posteriorly ajid has a better defined and more anterior equator.
Cadulus phenace Pilsbry and Sharp, from the Cercado formation of the Dominican Eepublic has a somewhat similar aspect, but it is smaller and more slender posteriorly. The apical extremity of C. phena® is simple, but on some specimens of C. volvulus it seems to be lobed. Unfortunately this characteristic part is commonly lost, and the, apparent scalloping of the orifice may possibly be due to breakage.
A similar but not identical species was recorded by Mansfield in 1930 from the Choctawhatchee formation in the uppermost bed at Jackson Bluff, Leon County, Fla. Mansfield's specimens, which he calls Cadulus aff. C. (Polyscfiides) quadridewtatus Ball, are distinctly dentate. One individual, however, which has an incomplete apical extremity, exhibits the oblique annulation of Gadila (GadUopsis) Woodring. The same obscure striation seems to be developed fortuitously on the Chipola examples.

630 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Godwins volvulus may be referable to the subgenus Platyschides Henderson, 1920. The shallow apical slits separate Platyschides from Potyschides, a difference, apparently of degree rather than kind. The type of Platyschides is grandis Verrill, a northern species ranging from Georges Bank to Hatteras and reaching a length of 15 millimeters or more. The subgeneric groupings in the fossil species are far from satisfactory, for the character on which they are primarily based the outline of the margin of the apical extremity is commonly lost.
Occurrence: Chipola formation, localities 2213C, 7183P.
Section GADILOPSIS Woodring
1925. Gadilopsis Woodring, Carnegie Inst. Washington Pub. 366, p. 206.
Type by original designation: Ditrupa dentalma Guppy. Miocene of the Bowden beds, Jamaica.
Shell moderately small, very slender, needle-shaped, slightly swollen very near aperture; sculpture consisting of oblique growth rings on posterior part of shell; apical opening small, unslit.
The geologic history and present distribution of this section, as traced by Pilsbry and Sharp, seem to fully justify their suggestion that the group of C. dentalinus should probably form a separate section. The needle-shape, slight swelling very near the aperture, and sculpture separate Gadttopsis from Gadila s. s. The living species of sculptured Gadilopsis are confined to the West Indian and adjoining waters, the Pacific coast of Central America and Mexico, and the East Indies. Pilsbry and Sharp expand the group to include similarly shaped smooth species. Woodring, 1925.
This mid-American group is apparently already established in the lower Miocene of Florida. The oblique annulation of the whorls seems, in the Alum Bluff species, to be a fortuitous character observed on several individuals but not all of any single species.

Cadulus (Gadila) spiniformis Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LX1I, figure 19
Shell a smooth, highly polished, slender tube. Posterior half gently arcuate and tapering gradually to an exceedingly small, circular orifice. Anterior portion nearly straight, varying but slightly in diameter. Maximum diameter within the anterior sixth. Cingulum illdefined. Shell rather abruptly but feebly constricted in front of the cingulum in a manner suggesting the attached end of some of the echinoid spines. , Cross section of cingulum circular, very slightly compressed dorsoventrally on either side of the equator. Margin of aperture thin, broadly oval in outline. Posterior orifice circular, apparently nondentate.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 8.5 millimeters; maximum diameter, 1.2 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351645. Type locality: No. 5079, half a mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla. Cadulus spiniformis is the largest of any of the Alum Bluff species. It is nearest to Cadulus volvulus of the Chipola fauna, but is more attentuated posteriorly, less uniform in diameter, and has a better defined and more anterior equator. The species is restricted to the Shoal River formation and is, furthermore, the only determinable member of the genus at that horizon. Cadulus abrwptus Meyer and Aldrich, so prolific at the Woods Bluff horizon, is similar in general contour, but larger and less slender posteriorly. Cadulus blountensis Mansfield, from a slightly higher horizon on Vaughan Creek in Walton County, has a somewhat similar outline but lacks the cingulum. Cadulus phenaae Pilsbry and Sharp from the Cercado formation of the Dominican Republic is relatively shorter and more gently curved posteriorly. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 3856r, 2645r, 3732r, 3742», 5079r, 9960r.

ADDENDA TO STENOGLOSSA
631

ADDENDA TO STENOGLOSSA

Exceptionally well preserved shells of Shoal Kiver age are exposed at Whites Creek on the EucheeannaKnox Hill road, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla. A large collection was sent in after the publication of the earlier parts of this Professional Paper. The species included in the addenda belong to families described in Part VI.
Family TEBEBBIDAE ,
Terebra (Strioterebrum) psesta Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figures ?33, 34
Shell slender, acutely tapering, the whorls tightly wound, minutely tabulated, the axial sculpture not sufficiently strong to break the even profile. Body whorl rather high for the genus, abruptly constricted into the short canal. Whorls 15 in the holotype, the initial turn apparently lost and the apical portion so worn that the line between the nuclear and postnuclear turns can not be traced. Nucleus certainly small, slender, and acutely tapering. Postnuclear whorls increasing in diameter slowly and with regularity. Sutures impressed. Presutural band occupying, with the sulcus, more than a third of the whorl; not conspicuously distinct; the sculpture on it similar in general pattern to that in front of the sulcus. Sulcus extremely shallow and relatively broad. Axial sculpture feeble and irregular; the ribs running about 19 on the early whorls of the holotype but increasing to 25 on the later, persistent to the posterior suture but more feeble on the band and nearly obsolete on the sulcus; the axials on the second figured specimen, little more than exaggerated resting stages. Spirals low and flat, 9 in front of the sulcus on the later whorls of the spire of the holotype, and 4, more obscure, lirae on the presutural band. Spirals on the base of the body and the canal finer and more closely spaced than on the medial portion of the body. Aperture broken in all specimens, probably rather narrow. Outer lip sharply constricted at the canal. Parietal wall thinly glazed, the wash not sufficient to entirely conceal the feeble sculpture. Margin of pillar twisted but no true fold developed. Anterior fascicle cut off from the base of the body by a smoothly concave area; the posterior margin of the fascicle sharply raised; the anterior, the continuation of the pillar margin; fascicle strongly corrugated by the incremental and broadly notched at its extremity.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 28.7 millimeters;

diameter, 7 millimeters. Second figured specimen: Height, 30 millimeters; diameter, 6.9 millimeters.
Holotype: U. 8. Nat. Mus. No. 497664; second fig: ured specimen, U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497665.
Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. Locality of second figured specimen: No. 10608, Whites Creek, half a mile below bridge on road between Eucheeanna and Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.
Terebra psesta is another of a large group in the Whites Creek fauna which, though closely related to the Shell Bluff species, seem taxonomically distinct. In the relatively high whorls and in the characters of the aperture and anterior canal, pillar, and fasciole, T. psesta closely resembles T. waltonen$is from Shell Bluff, and, less closely T. gattwensis Toula from the Isthmus of Panama. The sculpture pattern of the Whites Creek species, however, is more subdued in every detail than that of either T. waltomn$is or T. gatunensis. This tendency toward an evanescent sculpture is indicated perhaps in the subspecies T. waltonensis tribaka, in which the spirals are almost obsolete although the axials are relatively strong and regular. It is possible that the shell represented in figure 33 should be referred to a distinct species. The sculpture, both axial and spiral is further reduced, and probably a factor of greater importance the apical angle is perceptibly smaller. However the group exhibits such a wide range of variation that "the two forms from Whites Creek will be included under a single name until further material proves that more than one species is involved.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, localities 14436r, ?10608r.
Family TUBBITIDAE
Crassispira loxa Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXII, figure 1
Shell large, not very heavy, the whorls compressed, and the spire acutely tapering. Body and canal more then half the height of the entire shell, rather strongly constricted at the base for a Crassispvra; the anterior canal moderately long and broad. Apei decorti1 cated and protoconch lost. At least 10 whorls in the

633

634 THE -MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

conch, the early whorls badly rubbed; the early as well as the later whorls of the spire minutely tabulated and trapezoidal in outline, differing from the later whorls in the stronger definition of the anal fasciole. Whorls obliquely rippled with rounded axials, strongly protractive and evenly alined at the sutures, the series performing a half turn in passing from the apex to the body; axials uniformly strong from the fasciole to the suture but obsolete on the fasciole and dying out on the base of the body. Spiral lirae low, flat, and worn-looking; 4 primaries on each of the later whorls of the spire and more than double that number on the body, a single intercalary faintly visible between each pair of primaries and similar threads closely spaced on the fasciole. Base of the body and the anterior fasciole girded with less feeble threadlets. Suture distinct, undulated by the axials of the preceding whorl, a well-defined cord outlining the narrow tabulation in front of the suture, and, on the final whorl, a feeble thread between the sutural cord and the suture. Aperture obliquely lobate, the outer lip broadly arcuate, broken, unfortunately, in the unique type; the scar of the anal notch U-shaped and set squarely on the anal fasciole. Inner wall of aperture thinly glazed. Pillar moderately long and straight, reinforced. Canal with parallel margins; obscurely notched at the extremity.
Dimensions of imperfect holotype: Height, 33 millimeters; diameter, 9.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497671.
Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
Grassispira loxa is remarkable for its compressed, evenly tapering spire and the oblique axial rippling that adorns it. The sculpture of most of the Crassispira is more decided and the axials are narrower, more elevated, and less strongly protractive than they are in C. loxa. Nothing closely comparable is known. The type is unique.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 14436r.
Crassispira laurentii Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 24
Shell of average dimensions for the group, moderately heavy, rather slender. Apex lost in the unique type. Remaining whorls 5; the body and anterior canal probably as high as half the entire shell when perfect. Sutural band and fasciole sharply defined, occupying on the early whorls more than half the entire volution; relatively narrower toward the aperture. Sculpture in

front of the fasciole strongly reticulate, the protractive axials sharply elevated and uniformly strong from the fasciole to the anterior suture and, on the body, almost to the anterior sinus; increasing in number from slightly more than 20 on the earliest retained whorl to more than 30 on the body and the final whorl of the spire. Spirals flattened, 4 in front of the fasciole on the whorls of the spire, subnodular at the intersection with the axials and overridden by them; separated by narrower interspiral areas, with or without intercalated secondaries; number of lirae increased on the body whorl to about a dozen, those on the base of the body and the canal narrower and more widely spaced than those on the spire. Whorls narrowly tabulated. Sutural collar is smooth except for incrementals, exceedingly fine and obscure lirae, and the sharply elevated an^rior cord. Fasciole concave, sharply delimited both anteriorly and posteriorly, threaded with 2 or 3 low lirae and deeply insinuated by a broad, U-shaped siphonal scar; axis of sinus slightly closer to the anterior than to the posterior margin of the fasciole. Body merging with no distinct break into the rather broad anterior canal. Aperture narrow, linear-lanceolate. Outer lip broken, doubtless feebly arcuate and apparently smooth within. Posterior commissure grooved, the shallow channel persistent within the aperture. Inner wall of aperture heavily glazed, the margin of the glaze sharp and extending'in a broad curve from the commissure to the anterior fasciole; callus so thick that the sculpture is completely hidden. A narrow umbilical chink visible between the reverted callus and the anterior fasciole. Fasciole heavily corrugated by the incrementals, spirally lirate. Anterior extremity slightly damaged, but the shallow terminal notch traceable in the corrugations.
Dimensions of incomplete holotype: Height, 27 millimeters; maximum diameter, 8.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497661.
Type locality: No. 9957, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla.
Crassispira laurentii is one of a small group of species that flourished in the Floridian and West Indian waters during'the late lower and middle Miocene. The most closely related forms are perhaps G. calligonoides Gardner from the Shoal River, G. Uoimtensis Mansfield from the slightly, younger beds on Vaughan Creek in Walton County, and G. consors (Sowerby) of the West Indian and Gatun faunas. These species differ chiefly in outline and in the detail of the sculpture pattern.
The type is unique.
Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 9957r.

ADDENDA TO STBNOGLOSSA

635

Clavatula gunteri Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 25
Shell rather small, moderately heavy, the spire about double the height of the aperture, tapering rather rapidly to an acute apex. Whorls of conch a little less than 10, those of the protoconch 3. Apex badly rubbed; the initial turn of the protoconch minute and partially immersed, the two succeeding turns increasing rather rapidly in diameter; faint traces of an anterior keel and arcuate riblets on the final nuclear whorl. Early whorls of conch trapezoidal; the sutural collar not prominent; the axials relatively few and rippling. Adult axials narrow, strongly protractive, obtuse, increasing from less than 10 on the earliest conchal whorl to about 23 on the body; uniform in prominence between the fasciole and the anterior suture, irregular in spacing and elevation on the final half whorl; posterior termination of ribs at margin of fasciole abrupt. Spiral sculpture less prominent than the axial; spirals low, flattened lirae, restricted largely to the interaxial areas; 4 or 5 primaries on the whorls of the spire and about a dozen on the body; a secondary threadlet between the anterior pairs on the whorls of the spire and commonly with 2 or even 3 secondaries on the base of the body. Whorls narrowly tabulated in front of the impressed suture; the sutural collar well developed and distinct; the sutural cord rather broad with a few threadlets in front of it but none behind. Scar of anal opening strong and U-shaped, contained between the sutural cord and the terminals of the axials. Body short, rather abruptly constricted into the short broad canal. Aperture narrow, the margins nearly parallel. Outer lip dragged backward slightly on the preceding whorl and possibly subvaricose at certain stages; the notch for the protrusion of the eyestalks feebly indicated. Margin of labial callus sharp, reverted. No umbilical chink. Anterior fasciole rather narrow, lirate; the posterior margin of the fasciole forming one arm of the broad and rather deep, obliquely directed U-shaped terminal notch.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 18.1 millimeters; diameter, 6.2 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497662. Type locality: No. 9957, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. I have the pleasure of naming the species in honour of Herman Gunter, State Geologist of Florida, to whom we are indebted for some of the best of our material from Whites Creek. A Clavatula gunteri is not far removed from C. proebenina, which is also from the Shoal Eiver formation but comes from Shell Bluff, possibly a little lower in the section than the outcrop at Whites Creek. The
695462 47 10

Shell Bluff species is shorter and stouter, but perhaps the most obvious difference is in the axial ribbing. The axials in G. proebenina&ve distinctly broader and more widely spaced, running 15 to the body whorl in C. proebenina as compared to 23 in 0. gunteri. The axials are more numerous, too, than in 0. ebenina Ball, from the Caloosahatchee and Recent faunas, and the backward drag of the outer lip at the aperture is less pronounced than in the later species. The type is unique.
Occurrence: Shoal Eiver formation, locality 9957r.
"Drillia" haraldi Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LXII, figures 2, 3
Shell small, slender, acutely tapering, the body approximately half as high as the entire shell. Whorls probably between 10 and 11 in all. Protoconch small and paucispiral, badly worn; probably similar to that of "Drillia" centrodes Gardner, which includes a broad flat initial turn and half of another, succeeded by a broadly inflated and axially ribbed whorl with spiral lirae on the final half turn. Whorls of conch slender, increasing slowly in diameter, and the shoulder becoming increasingly broader and well-defined. Axial sculpture moderately strong and regular on the early whorls, tending to become feeble and irregular on the later; the axials rounded and nearly vertical, evanescent posteriorly; 8 or 9 on the early whorls of the spire, more strongly protractive, more numerous and not continued behind the periphery on the later whorls. Spirals, like the axials, largely restricted to the area in front of the fasciole, equally low arid flat on the costals and intercostals; three primary threadlets to each of the early whorls of the spire, the posterior outlining the shoulder, the middle and anterior evenly spaced between the shoulder and the anterior suture; a fourth primary lira coming into view behind the anterior suture on the final whorl of the spire, and 2 more added on the medial portion of the body; scarcely perceptible secondary threadlets intercalated between the primaries. Base of body finely threaded, separated from the closely lirate anterior canal by a slightly less crowded area. Shoulder closely appressed posteriorly, feebly concave on the later whorls, free from sculpture except for the U-shaped anal notch symmetrically disposed upon it and a few microscopically fine spiral scratches. Aperture obliquely lenticular, a little more than a third the height of the shell. Outer lip thinedged, broadly arcuate* and flaring forward, deeply notched for the extrusion of the siphonal fasciole, and nicked probably for the eyestalks. Inner wall of aperture rather abruptly constricted at the smoothly glazed base of the body. Anterior canal short, straight, open, obscurely emarginate terminally.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 12.6 millimeters;, maximum diameter, 4.3 millimeters.

636 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497670. Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. This collection was made by the Florida Geological Survey from the same locality as that indicated by No. 10603 of the U. S. Geological Survey.
I have the pleasure of naming this species in honor of Dr. Harald Rehder, the Acting Curator of Mollusca in the United States National Museum, upon whose generous and understanding assistance I can always rely.
"Drillia" haraldi is the possible descendant of the slightly older "Drillia" centrodes Gardner from Shell Bluff. The Shell Bluff species is less slender^than haraldi, includes fewer whorls, commonly bears 2 instead of 3 primary lirae upon the medial portion of the shell and possibly the most obvious distinction is more definitely shouldered and is corded directly in front of the suture.
The type is unique. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 14436r.
Agladrillia agla Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 23
Shell small, shining, the body whorl about half as high as the entire shell, its diameter increased by the terminal varix. Spire acutely tapering, the apex lost. Protoconch not known. Remaining whorls of conch constricted and slightly concave at the fascicle, expanding in front of the fascicle with the axial ribbing. Axials pinched, protractive, uniform in strength from the fasciole to the anterior suture and to the base of the body, 12 or 13 on the earliest retained whorls, the number increasing to 15; a faint suggestion of axial noding also evident on the compressed sutural band of the later whorls. Spiral sculpture restricted to 3 or 4 barely perceptible scratches on the axially ribbed portion of the whorls of the spire and the medial portion of the body with a further irregular scratching on the fasciole and sutural band; the base of the body and the canal regularly grooved, the degree of incision increasing anteriorly. Sutural band compressed, the incrementals retractive and fairly strong. Fasciole together with the band occupying more than half the width on the adolescent shell but less than half on the later whorls; the fasciole slightly concave and scarred with the broad U-shaped growth lines which are symmetrically disposed upon it. Body abruptly constricted into the short, broad canal. Aperture moderately wide for the group, lobate. Outer lip broken at the lower margin, flaring forward in front of the fasciole, sharp-edged, smooth within. A small pad of callus directly in front of the commissure on the parietal wall; parietal and pillar callus heavy,

the margin of the callus sharp. Canal short, defined by the constriction of the whorl and by the disappearance of the axial ribs. Anterior fasciole slightly swollen, finely lirate, broadly U-shaped terminally, the upper arm of the obliquely directed U-notch coincident with the posterior margin of the fasciole.
Dimensions of imperfect holotype: 16.3 millimeters; maximum diameter, 6.5 millimeters; diameter at right ang]es to maximum diameter, 5.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497663. Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. Agladrillia agla differs from A. empera from the Shoal River formation at Shell Bluff in the less elevate 1, more strongly protractive, and less numerous axials and in the more feeble spirals. We are indebted to Herman Gunter of the Florida State Geological Survey for this interesting specimen. The type js unique. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 14436r.
y Family CANCELLAEIDAE
Cancellaria eucheea Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LIT, figure 43
Shell large for the group, squat in outline. Whorls broadly rounded, narrowly tabulate^ rapidly enlarging; 6 in the unique type, the first whorl and a half included in the naticoid nucleus. Extreme tip possibly lost and the earliest remaining whorls rather badly rubbed. Both the axial and spiral sculpture probably initiated with the conch; sculpture on the whorls of the spire reticulate, the axials retractive, their outline less sharply defined than that of the 5 or 6 spirals that override them; interstices squarish and the intersections nodose. Body whorl inflated; axial ribbing stronger and more widely spaced relatively as well as absolutely, overridden by regularly spaced spiral fillets separated by interspaces of slightly more than their own width; a single secondary introduced midway between each pair of primaries; two finer lirae revolving on the narrow shoulder. Suture feebly channeled Aperture auriculate, moderately broad. Outer lip expanding with the curvature of the whorl, thickened and lirate within; the lirae not produced within the throat; margin possibly crenate in the young. Body abruptly constricted at the base. Parietal wall heavily washed, the margin of the callus sharply defined; deposit especially heavy at the commissure, a ridge developed opposite the posterior of* the labral lirae and produced far within the throat. Columellar folds istrong, the posterior shelflike and nearly horizontal, the less prominent anterior fold probably parallel to it within the aperture but deflected slightly forward at

ADDENDA TO STENOGLOSSA

637

the mouth; an incipient tubercle on the margin of the pillar simulating a fold but probably not produced within the aperture. Anterior fascicle closely lirate, arching away from the margin of the pillar and so leaving an -open umbilical chink between them.
Dimensions of holotype: Height, 33.5 millimeters; diameter, 21.5 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497450. Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. Collected by the Geological Survey of Florida and presented to the United States Geological Survey. Cancellaria euckeea is double the size of Cancellaria druidarum Gardner, the species which superficially it resembles. The pillar of drmdarum^ however, is triplicate rather than biplicate. Cancellaria cossmanni Olsson from the Gatun of Costa Rica is a smaller shell of similar outline and with a biplicate pillar, but the axial ribbing, particularly on the spire, is more elevated and more widely spaced than it is in G. eucheea and there are no secondary spirals on the body. Cancellaria alternata Conrad from the Choptank of Maryland is rather more elevated relatively and the whorls are more inflated medially. The characters of the aperture and the pillar folding, however, are strikingly similar. The mid-Tertiary members of the group of reticulata, the genotype, seem to have been numerous and diversified and C. eucheea is possibly an offshoot from that group. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 14436r.
Family MARGINELLIDAE
Marginella (Volvarina) eobella Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LV, figure 22
Shell of moderate dimensions for the genus, highly polished, unsculptured, ovate. Spire only about onefifth the height of the entire shell; the apical angle obtuse and about 90 degrees. Whorls probably about 4, the outlines and the sutures obscured by the surface glaze. Body obtusely shouldered, tapering smoothly to the rather wide anterior extremity. Aperture narrow, oblique, the margins subparallel. Outer lip slightly inwarped medially after the manner of M. bella Conrad; feebly varicose, produced backward across the preceding whorl. Margin of the narrow terminal varix defined externally by a shallow groove that becomes obsolete with the flattening of the varix both posteriorly and anteriorly. A few incipient rugae on the inner margin of the varix but no defined serration. Inner wall of aperture without reinforcing callus. Pillar quadruplicate; the posterior of the 4 delicate folds about midway between the extremities of the aperture and, like the fold in front of it, not far from

normal to the axis of the shell; the anterior pair of folds oblique and parallel to each other; the foremost of the folds marginal and twisted, fusing with the labral callus around the truncate anterior extremity.
Dimensions of hblotype: Height, 11.9 millimeters; greatest diameter, 6.0 millimeters.
Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 496284. Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek, on road from Eucheeanna to Kn,ox Hill,. 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton County, Fla. Marginella eobella is larger than M. bella s. s. or than any of the Floridian subspecies, but it is allied with that group by the inward bend of the medial portion of the outer lip, the absence of wash on the parietal wall, and in the number and disposition of the slender pillar folds. The type is unique. Occurrence: Shoal River formation, locality 14436r.
Family VOLUTIDAE
Caricella (Atraktus) florea Gardner, n. sp.
Plate LII, figure 31
Shell of moderate dimensions for the group but more than usually heavy. Probably slender, the anterior canal lost so that the relative proportions are not known. Apex eroded and characters obscured. Protoconch apparently coiled between 1% and 2 times, the conch a little more than 4 times. Initial nuclear spur worn down, the succeeding whorl broadly rounded. First whorl of conch laterally compressed, the succeeding volutions obliquely flattened posteriorly, expanded slightly anteriorly; body obscurely shouldered, not inflated medially, probably produced into a fairly long and slender anterior canal. Much of the sculpture lost through abrasion. Axial sculpture strongest at the opening of the conch, the axials narrow, uniform in strength between the sutures, evanescent before the close of the final whorl of the spire. Spiral lirae fine, crowded, overriding the axials on the earliest whorls of the spire, feeble on the later whorls, and on the body restricted to the shoulder and the canal. Sutures distinct, impressed slightly. Aperture narrow, lenticular, the outer lip broadly arcuate. Body very slightly constricted, the inner wall of the aperture descending almost obliquely from the commissure to the anterior canal. Parietal wash thin, extending only a little beyond the terminations of the pillar folds. Plications 4, the two posterior set well back and nearly normal to the axis of the shell; third fold equal to and probably parallel with the two behind it within the aperture, but its extremity bent forward at the mouth;' anterior fold decidedly more feeble'than the 3 behind it and, at the mouth, more oblique. Outer surface of

638 THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA

canal finely and obscurely lirate. Other characteristic features lost.

Dimensions of incomplete holotype: Height, 42 millimeters; diameter, 21.5 millimeters.

Holotype: U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497667.
Type locality: No. 14436, gully south of the road and east of the bridge over Whites Creek on road from Eucheeanna to Knox Hill, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, 1.7 miles southeast of Eucheeanna, Walton Cbunty, Fla.

The Caricella from Whites Creek may be closely re-

lated to Caricella (Atralctus) pycnoplecta described

from Shell Bluff. The Shell Bluff species was described

from an adolescent in an almost perfect «tate of preservation, so that the reticulate sculpture is excellently

displayed. The weakness of the sculpture of the Whites Creek individual is exaggerated by abrasion. The rela-

tive proportions of the two species are probably similar, and the number and disposition of the columellar

folds are identical. The species is known only from the

holotype.

N

Occurrence: Shoal Biver formation, locality 14436r.

Family IVdTRTDAE

Vexillum (Uromitra) triptum? Gardner

f

Plate LII, figure 32

A small delicate individual, more slender than the usual F. triptum from the Shoal Biver, was collected by Mr. Gunter, State Geologist of Florida, from Whitest Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, and presented by him to the United States Geological Survey. It may represent a distinct species or subspecies, but the individual variation in V. triptum is great and the Whites Creek specimen is unique. The Whites Creek individual differs further in the lower and more closely spaced axials, the earlier evanescence of the axials, and the absence of a spiral sculpture. The degree of development of the spirals is a variable character throughout the species, but in the Shoal Biver individuals, even if absent upon the rest of the shell, they are almost always clearly present on the- anterior fasciole. In the Whites Creek specimen, however, only the faintest trace of a liration on the fasciole can be detected.
Height of the figured specimen,*6.9 millimeters; diameter, 2.3 millimeters.
The figured specimen is U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497666.

695462 47 11

PLATES LII-LXII

639

PLATE LII
FIGURE 1. Mitrella perfervida (Dall) (p. 510). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mas. No. 107387), from Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 18.6 mm.; diameter, including terminal varix, 7.3 mm. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 2. Mitrella phagon Gardner, 11. sp. (p. 507). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371836), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 8.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.8 mm.
FIGURE 3. Mitrella trajectionis (Maury) (p. 508)'. Apertural view of topotype? (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371864), from the Chipola River 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla; height, 6.4 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.5 inm.
FIGURE 4. Mitrella dallina Gardner, n. sp. (p. 509). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371837), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 6.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.3 mm.
FIGURE 5. Mitrella alumen Gardner, n. sp. (p. 508). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114218), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 10.1 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.2 mm.
FIGURE 6. Mitrella asema Gardner, n. sp. (p. 509). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371834), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 11.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.0 mm.
FIGURE 7. Mitrella ischna Gardner, n. sp. (p. 511). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371832), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height. 15.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 5.6 mm.
FIGURE 8. Mitrella ischna mitrodita Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 512). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371833), from Tenmile Creek, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 16.0mm.; maximum diameter, 6.3 mm.
FIGURE 9. Mitrella pedana Gardner, n. sp. (p. 501). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371840), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 4.7 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.0 mm.
FIGURE 10. Mitrella sima Gardner, n. sp. (p. 505). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371839), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 4.2 mm.; maximum diameter 1.8 mm.
FIGURE 11. Mitrella belonis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 506). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371838), from Boynton Landing, Choctawhatchee River, Washington County, Fla.; height, 6.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.5 mm.
FIGURE 12. Mitrella blastos Gardner, n. sp. (p. 506). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371865), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 5.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.5 mm.
FIGURE 13. Strombina 'lampra Gardner, n. sp. (p. 515). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371849), from 3% miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, Walton County, Fla.; height, 8.7 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.0 mm.
FIGURES 14, 15. Strombina lissa Gardner, n. sp. (p. 514). 14. Apertural view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371869), figured to show nuclear whorls, X 10. 15. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371869), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 10.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 5 mm.
FIGURE 16. Strombina ceryx Gardner, n. sp. (p. 515). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371850), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 8.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.3 mm.
FIGURE 17. Mitrella juncea Gardner, n. sp. (pi 502). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371842), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 6.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.1 mm.
FIGURE 18. Mitrella oxia Gardner, n. sp. (p. 507). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371835), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 7.2 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.0 mm.
FIGURE 19. Mitrella oryzoides Gardner, n. sp. (p. 504). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371845), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 3.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.5 mm.
FIGURE 20. Mitrella mikra Gardner, n. sp. (p. 503). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. 371846), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 3.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.7 mm.
FIGURE 21. Mitrella perfervida megala Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 511). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371881), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 22.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 10.8 mm.
FIGURE 22. Mitrella nanna Gardner, n. sp. (p. 505). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371847), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 4.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.6 mm.
FIGURE 23. Mitrella sti'kta Gardner, n. sp. (p. 505). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371841), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height 5.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.1 mm.
FIGURE 24. Mitrella tyiha Gardner, n. sp. (p. 502). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371843), from one-half mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height 5.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.0 mm.
FIGURE 25. Mitrella photeina Gardner, n. sp. (p. 503). Apertural" view of holotype (U. S.' Nat. Mus. No. 371844), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 5.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.1 mm.
FIGURES 26-28. Strombina waltonia Gardner, n. sp. (p. 513). 26. Apertural view of immature paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371848), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 14.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.7 mm. 27. Rear view of incomplete holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371848); height, 23 mm.; maximum diameter, 8.5 mm. 28. Apertural view of incomplete holotype.
FIGURE 29. Strombina aldrichi (Maury) (p. 514). Apertural view of incomplete specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371883), from Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 16.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 5.7 mm.
FIGURE 30. Strombina'aldrichi nemoralis (Maury) (p. 514). Apertural view of topotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. 371868), from Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 12.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.6 mm.
FIGURE 31. Caricella (Atraktus) fiorea Gardner, n. sp. (p. 637). Apertural view of incomplete holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497667), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 42 mm.; diameter, 21.5 mm.
FIGURE 32. Vexillum (Uromitra) triptuml Gardner (p. 638)." Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497666), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 6.9 mm.; diameter, 2.3 mm.
FIGURE 33. Terebra (Strioterebrum) psesta? Gardner, n. sp. (p. 633)". Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497665), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 30 mm.; diameter, 6.9 mm.
FIGURE 34. Terebra (Strioterebrum) psesta Gardner, n. sp. (p. 633). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. 497664), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 28.7 mm.; diameter, 7 mm.
FIGURE 35. Urosalpinx tribaka Gardner, n. sp. ("p. 531). Apertural'view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371857), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 10.9 mm.; diameter, 6.2 mm.
FIGURES 36, 37. Urosalpinx phagon Gardner, n. sp. (p. 530). 36. Apertural view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371856), from Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 7.4 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.6 mm. 37. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371856), height, 16.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 9.2 mm.
FIGURE 38. Strombina walli Mansfield (p. 516). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 352671), from flood wash, Caroni County, Montserrat Ward, 1 mile south of Brasso, Trinidad, British West Indies; height, 6 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.4 mm. (After Mansfield.)
FIGURE 39. Paziella (Dallimurex) fusinoides Gardner, n. sp. (p. 524). Apertural view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371854), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 14 mm.; maximum diameter, 7.5 mm.
FIGURES 40, 41. Muricopsis laccopoia Gardner, n. sp. (p. 529). 40. Apertural view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371880), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 9.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 5.3 mm. 41. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371880); height, 18 mm.; maximum diameter, 9.8 mm.
FIGURE 42. Paziella (Dallimurex) fusinoides Gardner, n. sp. (p. 524). Apertural view of incomplete holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371854), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 36.7 mm.; maximum diameter, 16.5 mm.
FIGURE 43. Cancellaria eucheea Gardner, n. sp. (p. 636). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497450), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 33.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 21.5 mm.
FIGURE 44. Urosalpinx xustris Gardner,'n. sp. (p~. 531). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371858), from Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 25 mm.; maximum diameter, 14.5 mm.
FIGURE 45. Ursalpinx tribaka Gardner, n. sp. (p. 531). Apertural view of incomplete holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371857), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton Countv, Fla.; height, 22.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 13.5 mm.
640

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LII

GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

45

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LIII

14 V

w * 15
GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROLP.

PLATE LIII
FIGURE 1, 2. Murex (Murex) chipolanus Ball (p. 517). 1. Apertural view of lectotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371885), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 49 mm.; diameter, including varices, 26 mm. 2. Tip of juvenile topotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371885), X 10.
FIGURE 3. Murex, (Murex) nicholsi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 519). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371851), from 5 to 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 25 mm.; diameter, including varices, 14.5mm.
FIGURE 4. Murex (Murex) dasus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 518). Apertural view of slightly imperfect holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112057), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 33.4 mm.; diameter, including spines, 20.5 mm.
FIGURE 5. Murex (Chicoreus) folidodes Gardner, n. sp. (p. 520). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371852), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 43.3 mm.; diameter, including varices, 25 mm.
FIGURE 6. Eupleura pterina Gardner, n. sp. (p. 532). Apertural view of imperfect holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371882), from 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 15.3 mm.; diameter, including varices, 9.6 mm.
FIGURE 7. Incertae sedis (p. 522). Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371878), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 14.5 mm.; diameter, including varices, 8.3 mm.
FIGURE 8. Personella floridana Gardner, n. sp. (p. 535). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371879), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 24 mm.; diameter, including varices, 17 mm.
FIGURE 9. Pieropurpura dryas Gardner, n. sp. (p. 525). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371855', from 100 yards below Oak Grove bridge, Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 29 mm.; diameter, including varices, 20 mm.
FIGURE 10. Murex (Chicoreus?) pyknos Gardner, n. sp. (p. 522). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 115771), from 5 miles west of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 32 mm.; diameter, including varice?, 20 8 mm.
FIGURE 11. Murex (Chicoreus) aldrichi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 521). Apertural view of holotype (Johns Hopkins Univ. collection), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 53.5 mm.; diameter, including varices, 31.5 mm.
FIGURES 12, 13. Paziella (Dallimurex) lychnia Gardner, n. sp. (p. 523). Holotype and paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371853), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.
12. Apertural view of imperfect holotype; height, 25.5 mm.; diameter, including varices, 15 mm. 13. Apertural view of paratvpe; height, 16.9 mm.; diameter, including varices, 9.6 mm. FIGURE 14. Typhis (Taliti/phis) pterinus Gardner (p. 528). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371860), from Shell Bluff,
Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 20 mm.; diameter, including varices, 13 mm. FIGURES 15, 16. Typhis (Talityphis) alatus obesus Gabb (p. 527).
15. Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371859), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.: height, 21 mm.; diameter, including varices, 14 mm.
16. Tip of a second individual, also U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371859, X 10. FIGURE 17. Typhis linguiferus Ball (p. 527). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112183), from Tenmile Creek, Chipola
River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 15 mm.; diameter, including varices, 7.2 mm. (After Ball.)
641

PLATE LIV
FIGURES 1-3. Ficus eopapyratia Gardner, n. sp. (p. 539). 1. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114097), from 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 46.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 22.5 mm. 2. Early whorls of holotype. 3. Rear view of holotype.
FIGURES 4, 5. Cypraea (Cypraeorbis) chilona Dall (p. 541). 4. Apertural view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497120), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; length, 51 mm. (After Dall.) 5. Dorsal view of lectotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498388), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; length, 45.0 mm.; lateral diameter, 36.5 mm. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 6. Semicassis (Tylocassis) aldrichi (Dall) (p. 536). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112207), from Tenmile Creek, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 26.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 19.0 mm. (After Dall.)
FIGURES 7, 8. Cypraea (Cypraeorbis) tapeina Gardner, n. sp. (p. 541). 7. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497854), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; length, 33 mm.; lateral diameter, 24 mm.; dorsoventral diameter, 19 mm. 8. Apical view of holotype.
FIGURES 9, 10. Trivia vaughani Gaidner, n. sp. (p. 542). 9. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371861), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; length alone; axis, 8.0 mm.; dorsoventral diameter, 5.5 mm. 10. Dorsal view of holotype.
FIGURE 11. Sconsia paralaevigata Gardner, n. sp. (p. 537). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371888), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 36 mm.; maximum diameter, 25 mm.
FIGURES 12, 13. Cypraea (Cypraeorbis) heilprinii Dall (p. 540). 12. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114103), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; length along apertural axis, 29 mm.; dorsoventral diameter, 15 mm. 13. Dorsal view of holotype.
FIGURES 14, 15. Alaba dodona Gardner, n. sp. (p. 580). 14. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350405), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 4.5± mm.; maximum diameter, 1.4 mm. 15. Apertural view of incomplete paratype (t). S. Nat. Mus. No. 136045), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 2.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.2 mm.
FIGURE 16. Litiopa palaeosargassina Maury (p. 579). Apertural view of topotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350402), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 3.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 2 mm.
FIGURE 17. Alaba chipolana Dall (p. 580). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113384), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 6.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.75 mm. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 18. Morum (Oniscidia) chipolanum (Dall ms.) Gardner, n. sp. (p. 538). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114095), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 32 mm.; maximum diameter, 20 mm.
642

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE HV

GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LV

21 23 W 24 " 25
GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

PLATE LV

FIGURES 1, 2. Orthaulax gabbi Dall (p. 560). 1. Apertural view of cotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112218), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River,

Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 65.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 35.0 mm. (After Dall.) 2. Profile of cotype shown in figure 1. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 3. Strombus aldrichi Dall (p. 558). Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112226), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height 59 [62] mm.; maximum diameter, 36 mm. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 4. Strombus dodoneus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 559). Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350381), from Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 69 mm.; maximum diameter including tubercles, 51 mm.
FIGURE 5. Orthaulax gabbi Dall (p. 560). Apertural view of second cotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112218), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 35.7 mm.; maximum diameter,

17.5 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 6. Strombus chipolanus Dall (p. 558). Incomplete specimen showing adolescent sculpture (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112224?),
from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; diameter, 22.0 mm. (After
Dall.) " FIGURE 7. Strombus dodoneus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 559). Apertural view of juvenile paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371867), from Oak

Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 9.7 mm.; diameter, 3.4 mm. FIGURE 8. Strombus aldrichi Dall (p. 558). Apertural view of holotype shown in figure 3. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 9. Strombus dodoneus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 559). Apertural view of holotype shown in figure 4. FIGURE 10.' Petalochonchus sculpturatus H. C. Lea (p. 585). Early coils of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350411), from Oak Grove,
Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla., X 15. FIGURE 11. Lernintina granifera (Say) (p. 584). Holotype from "Maryland." (After Say.)

FIGURE 12. Caecum pararegulare Gardner, n. sp. (p. 583). Lateral view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351485), from % mile west of Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 2.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 0.6 mm.

FIGURE 13. Caecum chipolanum, Gardner, n. sp. (p. 583). Lateral view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329000), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 2.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 0.6 mm.
FIGURE 14. Epitonium (Clathrus) alaquaense Mansfield (p. 577). Apertural view of incomplete specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498013), from 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 7 mm.; maximum diameter, 4mm.
FIGURE 15. Strombiformis (Polygi.reulima} defuniak Gardner, n. sp. (p. 574). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498018), from 3% miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, Walton County, Fla.; height, 4.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.6 mm.

FIGURE 16. Strombiformis ischna Gardner, n. sp. (p. 573). Apertural view of holotype (U. S.'-Nat. Mus. No. 498019), from one-half mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 7.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.6mm.
FIGURE 17. Strombiformis scotti (Maury) (p. 573). Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498017), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 7.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.7 mm.

FIGURE 18. Strombiformis (Polygireulimaf) chipolana (Maury) (p. 573). Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498016), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 8 mm.; maximum diameter, 2 mm.
FIGURE 19. Modulus willcoxii Dall (p. 582). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113386), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 20 mm.; maximum diameter, 17.8 mm. (After Dall.) *

FIGURE 20. Lemintina papulosa (Guppy) (p. 585). Tube (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498201), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; diameter of tube, 9 mm.
FIGURE 21. Petaloconchus sculpturatus H. C. Lea (p. 585). Holotype? (Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia 1575), from Petersburg, Va., X 8.

FIGURE 22. Marginella (Volvarina) eobella Gardner, n. sp. (p. 637). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 496284), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 11.9 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.0 mm.
FIGURE 23. Agladrillia agla Gardner, n. sp. (p. 636). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497663), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 16.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.5 mm.
FIGURE 24. Crassispira laurentii Gardner, n. sp. (p. 634). Apertural view of incomplete holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497661), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, J27 mm.; maximum diameter, 8.5 mm.

FIGURE 25. Clavatula gunteri Gardner, n. sp. (p. 634). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497662), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County. Fla.; height, 18.1 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.2 mm.

FIGURE 26. Modulus biconicus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 581). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114117), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 9.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 7.8 mm.
FIGURE 27. Modulus compactus Dall (p. 581). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113387), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 9.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 8.0 mm. (After Dall.)

695462 47- -12

643

PLATE LVI
FIGURES 1, 2. Calyptraea crenata Gardner, n. sp. (p. 562). 1. Dorsal view of holotype (IT. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136053), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 6.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 14.8 mm.; diameter at right angles to maximum diameter, 13.7 mm. 2. Ventral view of holotype.
FIGURES 3^5. Calyptraea centralis (Conrad) (p. 562). 3. Lateral view of specimen in collection of Johns Hopkins University from St. Marys River, Md.; height, 10 mm.; diameter, 18 mm. (After Martin.) 4. Ventral view of specimen. (After Martin.) 5. Dorsal view of specimen. (After Martin.)
FIGURES 6, 7. Crucibulum multilineatum (Conrad) (p. 569). 6. Dorsal view of specimen in collection of Johns Hopkins University from Jones Wharf, St. Marys County, Md.; Choptank formation; height, 7 mm.; maximum diameter, 30 mm. (After Martin.) 7. Ventral view of specimen. (After Martin.)
FIGURES 8, 9. Crucibulum constrictum (Conrad) (p. 568). 8. Dorsal view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 325458) from Yorktown, Va.; height, 11.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 33 mm. 9. Ventral view of same specimen.
FIGURES 10, 11. Cntcibulum chipolanum Dall (p. 567). 10. Lateral view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112783), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 14.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 24.5 mm. 11. Ventral view of specimen shown in figure 10.
FIGURES 12, 13. Crucibulum grande (Say) (p. 569). 12. Lateral view of holotype, aX !(?). (After Say.) 13. Ventral view of holotype, aX !(?). (After Say.)
FIGURES 14, 15. Crucibulum constrictum conjuge Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 568). 14. Dorsal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371874), from near Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 9.2 mm.; maximum diameter, 16.7 mm. 15. Ventral view of holotype.
FIGURES 16, 17. Crucibulum ivaltonense Gardner, n. sp. (p. 568). 16. Ventral view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371873), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 14 mm.; maximum diameter, 25.5 mm. 17. Dorsal view of holotype.
FIGURES 18-20. Crucibulum chipolanum dodoneum Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 567). Holotype and paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350451), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.
18. Lateral view of juvenile paratype showing nuclear coil, X 4. 19. Ventral view of holotype; height, 13 mm.; maximum diameter, 25 mm. 20. Dorsal view of holotype. FIGURES 21, 22. Crucibulum constrictum (Conrad) (p. 568). 21. Ventral view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 325459) from locality IK miles north of Suffolk, Va.; height, 27 mm.; maxi-
mum diameter, 64 mm. 22. Dorsal view of same specimen.
644

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LVI

GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

22

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER ]42 PLATE LVII

28 GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

PLATE LVII
FIGURE 1. Turritella subgrundifera Dall (p. 590). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113440), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, in present state, 61 mm.; maximum diameter, 17 mm. (After Ball.)
FIGURE 2. Turritella alcida Dall (p. 591). Apertural view of holotype (IT. S. Nat. Mus. No. 135054), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height (estimated), 85 mm.; maximum diameter, 21.5 mm. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 3. Turritella alcida bicarinata Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 592). Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350427), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height 73 mm.; maximum diameter, 19.5 mm.
FIGURES 4, 5. Turritella (Torcula) dalli Gardner, n. sp. (p. 594). 4. Rear view of incomplete holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329008), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height of incomplete specimen, 55.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 19.0 mm. 5. Apertural view of immature paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329008); height, 47.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 11.0 mm.
FIGURE 6. Turritella (Torcula?) jacitla Gardner, n. sp. (p. 596). Apertural view of imperfect holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498021), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 36 mm.; maximum diameter, 12 mm.
FIGURE 7. Turritella (Torcula 1?) mixta Dall (p. 596). Apertural view of incomplete topotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113476), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height of incomplete specimen, 62 mm.; maximum diameter, 22 mm.
FIGURE 8. Turritella (Torcula?) chipolana Dall (p. 597). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113442), from 1 mile west of Baileys Ferrv, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 68 mm.; maximum diameter, 18 mm. (After Dall.) '
FIGURE 9. Syncera microgaza Gardner, n. sp. (p. 602). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329042), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 3.0 mm.; diameter, 1.5 mm.
FIGURE 10. Rissoa phagon Gardner, n. sp. (p. 606). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136051), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 1.25 mm.; diameter, 0.9 mm.
FIGURES 11, 12. Turritella gatunensis blountensisl Mansfield (p. 592). 11. Apertural view of juvenile (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498024), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 9.3 mm.; diameter, 2.8 mm. 12. Apertural view of older individual (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498024); height, 15.5 mm.; diameter, 5.1 mm.
FIGURES 13, 14. Turritella segmenta Gardner, n. sp. (p. 593). 13. Apertural view of three later whorls of incomplete cotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371863), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 16 mm.; diameter, 7.5 mm. 14. Apertural view of early and middle whorls of another incomplete cotype (possibly representing same individual as figure 13) ; height, 20.5 mm.; diameter, 5.7 mm.
FIGURE 15. Turritella (Torculal) sp.(p. 595). Apertural view of incomplete specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498025), from Whites
Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 23 mm.; diameter, 5.6 mm. FIGURE 16. Turritella (Torcula) waltonensis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 594). Apertural view of incomplete holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No.
371862), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height of incomplete shell, 46 mm.; diameter, 15.6 mm. FIGURE 17. Turritella (Torcula) sp. cf. T. (T.) altilira Conrad (p. 595). Incomplete specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498023), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 24 mm.; diameter, 8 mm. FIGURE 18. Gegania acutissima (Dall) (p. 579). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113472), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 7.5 mm.; diameter, 5 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 19. Rissoa litiopaopsis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 607). Apical view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329036), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 3.4 mm.; diameter, 1.9 mm. FIGURES 20, 21. Cheilea dryas (Dall ms.) Gardner, n. sp. (p. 570). 20. Dorsal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371877), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 6 mm.; maximum diameter along axis of shell, 11 mm. 21. Apertural view of holotype. FIGURES 22, 23. Capulus chipolanus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 570). 22. Apical view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329059), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 3.2 mm.; diameter, 2.6 mm. 23. Ventral view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329059); height, 4.5 mm.; diameter, 3.7 mm. FIGURE 24. Rissoa litiopaopsis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 607). Apertural view of holotype shown in figure 19. FIGURE 25. Crepidula plana Say (p. 565). Dorsal view of specimen (U. S. Nat. "Mus. No. 136061), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; length, 37.5 mm.; width, 20.5 mm. FIGURE 26. Crepidula plana Say? (p. 565). Dorsal view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350470), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; length (a warped individual), 22 mm.; width, 20 mm.; exterior, X 1. FIGURES 27, 28. Iselica psila Gardner, n. sp. (p. 572). 27. Apical view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329026), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 3.0 mm.; diameter, 2.5 mm. 28. Apertural view of holotype. FIGURE 29. Fossarus chipolanus^(Da\\) (p. 571). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112660), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 2.25 mm.; diameter, 2.3 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 30. Fossams florins Gardner, n. sp. (p. 571). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371866), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 2.8 mm.; diameter, 2.0 mm. FIGURES 31, 32. Xenophora textilina Dall (p. 561). 31. Basal view of larger of two cotypes (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112831), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun, County, Fla.; maximum diameter, 41 mm. 32. Apertural view of smaller cotype; height, 2U mm.; maximum diameter, 25 mm. FIGURE 33. Rissoina vittata Gardner, n. sp. (p. 605). Apertuial view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114359), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 3.6 mm.; diameter, 1.5 mm. FIGURE 34. Rissoina (Mirarissoina) juncea Gardner, n. sp. (p. 603). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329041), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 3.1 mm.; diameter, 1.2 mm. FIGURE 35. Rissoina (Zebinella) chipolana Dall, n. sp. (p. 604). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113582), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 6 mm.; diameter, 2.5 mm. (After Dall.)
645

PLATE LVIII
FIGURES 1, 2. Architectonica chipolana (Dall) (p. 587). 1. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329031), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 7.5 mm.; diameter, 1.5 mm. 2. Basal view of holotype.
FIGURES 3-5. Architectonica verecunda Gardner (p. 589). 3. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 352117), from 3% miles southwest of De Funiak Springs, Walton County, Fla.; height, 4 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.5 mm. 4. Apical view of holotype. 5. Basal view of holotype.
FIGURES 6, 7. Architectonica alvear Gardner (p. 588). 6. Apical view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350446), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 17 mm.; maximum diameter, 25 mm. 7. Apertural view of holotype.
FIGURE 8. Architectonica quadriseriata waltonensis Gardner (p. 588). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351515), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 14 mm.; maximum diameter, 26 mm.
FIGURE 9. Architectonica alvear Gardner (p. 588). Basal view of holotype shown in figures 6 and 7. FIGURE 10. Architectonica quadriseriata waltonensis Gardner (p. 588). Basal view of holotype shown in figure 8.
646

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LVIII

GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

GEOLOGICAL STJEVEY

PEOPESSIONAL PAPEE 142 PLATE LIX

37 ^^^^ 38
GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

PLATE LIX

FIGURES 1, 2. Natica (Naticarius) precursor Gardner, n. sp. (p. 545). 1. Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329061), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County,
Fla.; height, 11.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 10 mm.
2. Apertural view of holotype. FIGURE 3. Natica (Natica) alticallosa Ball (p. 545). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112841), from Tenmile Creek,
1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.: height, 18 mm.; maximum diameter, 18 mm.
(After Ball.)
FIGURE 4. Pachycrommiitm dodonum Gardner, n. sp. (p. 557). Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136073), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 37.5 mm.; diameter (outer lip lost), 25± mm.
FIGURE 5. Polinices robustus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 550). Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351586), from the first ravine
below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 39± mm.; diameter (outer lip lost), 29± mm. FIGURE 6. Natica (Naticarius) precursor Gardner, n. sp. (p. 545). Outer surface of operculum (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329062), from
1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla., X3. FIGURES 7, 8. Natica (Stigmaulax) guppiana toulana Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 547).
7. Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351564), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 20 mm.; maximum diameter, 20 mm.
8. Apertural view of holotype. FIGURE 9. Natica (Stigmaulax) guppiana Toula (p. 546). Rear view of holotype, from the cut at the Gatun Locks, Panama Canal;
height, 18 mm.; maximum diameter, 18 mm. (After Toula.)
FIGURES 10, 11. Natica (Tectonatica) mino Gardner, n. sp. (p. 547). 10. Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351571), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 6.4 mm;
maximum diameter, 6 mm. 11. Apertural view of holotype. FIGURE 12. Pachycrommium burnsii (Ball) (p. 557). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112954), from Tenmile Creek.
Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 18 mm.; maximum diameter, 15 mm. (After Ball.)
FIGURE 13. Pachycrommium dodonum Gardner, n. sp. (p. 557). Apertural view of holotype shown in figure 4. FIGURE 14. Polinices robustus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 550). Apertural view of holotype shown in figure 5.
FIGURES 15, 16. Polinices judsoni (Maury) (p. 549). 15. Rear view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351575), from 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.;
height, 18.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 13.5 mm. 16. Apertural view of same specimen. FIGURES 17-19. Natica (Tectonatica) semen Gardner, n. sp. (p. 547). Holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371876), from Oak Grove, Yellow
River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height. 2.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.4 mm. 17. View of holotype with operculum still in position.
18. Apertural view of holotype. 19. Rear view of holotype.
FIGURES 20, 21. Polinices! dernieryptus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 550). 20. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112926), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun
County, Fla.; height, 7.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.0 mm. 21. Rear view of holotype. FIGURE 22. Polinices (Neverita) chipolanus Ball (p. 551). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112870), from Tenmile
Creek, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 21.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 22 mm.
FIGURES 23, 24. Natica (Tectonatica!) platabasis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 548). 23. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371875), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County,
Fla.; height, 12.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 11.5 mm. 24. Rear view of holotype.
FIGURES 25-27. Euspira rotunda Gardner, n. sp. (p. 552). 25. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351597), from 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 9.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 9.0 mm. 26. Apical view of juvenile paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497119), from 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County,
Fla., X 8. 27. Rear view of holotype. FIGURE 28. Globularia fischeri (Ball) (p. 556). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112934?), from Tenmile Creek,
Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 33 mm.; maximum diameter, 38 mm. (After Ball.) FIGURES 29, 30. Polinices (Neverita) eucallosus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 551).
29. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350487), from Oak Grove, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 24.7 mm.; maxi-
mum diameter, 26.5 mm. 30. Rear view of holotype. FIGURES 31, 32. Sinum chipolanum Ball (p. 553). 31. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112967), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County,
Fla.; height, 31 mm.; maximum diameter, 31 mm. 32. Rear view of holotype.
FIGURES 33, 34. Sinum waltonense Gardner?, n. sp. (p. 553). 33. Rear view of large adult (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498393), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.;
height, 27 mm.; maximum diameter, 27 mm. 34. Apertural view.
FIGURES 35, 36. Sinum waltonense Gardner, n. sp. (p. 553).
35. Rear view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371887), from 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 15.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 13.5 mm.
36. Apical view of juvenile topotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371887), X 8. FIGURE 37. Sinum dodoneum Gardner, n. sp. (p. 554). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136075), from Oak Grove,
Okaloosa County, Fla.; height 7 mm.; maximum diameter, 23 mm. FIGURE 38. Sinum waltonense Gardner, n. sp. (p. 553). Apertural view of holotype shown in figure 35. FIGURE 39. Sinum dodoneum, Gardner, n. sp. (p. 554). Rear view of holotype shown in figure 37.

695462 47 13

647

PLATE LX
FIGURE 1. Sigatica euglypta Gardner, n. sp. (p. 555). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371886), from Boynton Landing, Choctawhatchee River, "Washington County, Fla.; height, 19.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 16.5 mm.
FIGURE 2. Sigatica caradica (Ball) (p. 555). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 107379), from Oak Grove, Okaloosa
County, Fla.; height, 8 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.6 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 3. Astraea dalli (Maury) (p. 610). Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112995), from 1 mile below Baileys
Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 3.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 5.7 mm. FIGURE 4. Chlorostoma (Omphalius) exolutum (Conrad) (p. 616). Apertural view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112572), from
Ballast Point, Fla.; height, 12 mm.; maximum diameter, 13 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 5. Sigatica euglypta Gardner, n. sp. (p. 555). Rear view of holotype shown in figure 1. FIGURE 6. Tricolia affinis chipolana Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 609). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329107), from
1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 8.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.2 mm. FIGURE 7. Didianemat waltonia Gard'ner, n. sp. (p. 613). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351638), from near Shell
Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 1.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.4 mm. FIGURE 8. Tricolia probrevis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 609). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114434), from 1 mile below
Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 2.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.8 mm.
FIGURES 9, 10. Chlorostoma (Omphalius) exolutum limatum Dall (p. 617). 9. Apertural view of lectotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329112), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 5 mm.; maximum diameter, 7.3 mm. 10. Basal view of lectotype shown in figure 9.
FIGURE 11. Astraea dalli (Maury) (p. 610). Basal view of specimen shown in figure 3. FIGURE 12. Chlorostoma (Omphalius) exolutum (Conrad) (p. 616). Basal view of specimen shown in figure 4. (After Dall.) FIGURE 13. Tricolia affinis chipolana Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 609). Apertural view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114369), from
the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 8.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 5.0 mm. FIGURE 14. " Vitrinella' excavata Gardner, n. sp. (p. 598). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351628), from Shell Bluff,
Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 1.1 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.0 mm. FIGURES 15, 16. Astraea (Lithopoma) chipolana (Dall) (p. 611).
15. Outer surface of operculum (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 114439), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla., X 4.
16. Surface of attachment of operculum shown in figure 15, X 4. FIGURE 17. " Vitrinella" waltonia Gardner, n. sp. (p. 598). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351626), from Shell Bluff,
Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 1.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.0 mm. FIGURES 18-20. "Vitrinella" seminola Gardner, n. sp. (p. 597).
18. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351624), from Summerville mill, 1 mile east of Argyle, Walton County,
Fla.; height, 1.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.7 mm. 19. Basal view of holotype. 20. Apical view of holotype. FIGURE 21. Calliostoma rhombotoide Gardner, n. sp. (p. 619). Apical view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498392), from Whites
Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 3.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.5 mm. FIGURE 22. "Vitrinella" excavata Gardner, n. sp. (p. 598). Basal view of holotype shown in figure 14. FIGURES 23, 24. "Vitrinella" waltonia Gardner, n. sp. (p. 598).
23. Basal view of holotype shown in figure 17. 24. Apical view of holotype shown in figure 17. FIGURE 25. "Vitrinella" excavata Gardner, n. sp. (p. 598). Apical view of holotype shown in figure 22. FIGURES 26, 27. Calliostoma rhombotoide Gardner, n. sp. (p. 619). 26. Apertural view of holotype shown in figure 21. 27. Basal view of holotype shown in figure 21. FIGURES 28, 29. Solariella'laqua Mansfield (p. 621). 28. Apical view of specimen (U. S. iNTat. Mus. No. 498394), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.;
height, 3.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.0 mm. 29. Apical view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498395), from T\ hites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.;
height, 3.4 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.9 mm. FIGURE 30. Astraea (Lithopoma} chipolana (Dall) (p. 611). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112994), from the
lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 11.5 mm.'; maximum diameter, 11.0mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 31. Solariella turriteUa Dall (p. 621). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113081), from 1 mile below Baileys
Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 5.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.0 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 32. Liotia (Arene) agenea Dall (p. 612). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113091), from 1 mile below Baileys
Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 2.0mm.; maximum diameter, 2.5 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 33. Solariella laqiia Mansfield (p. 621). Basal view of specimen shown in figure 29. FIGURE 34. Calliostoma ceramicum Dall (p. 619). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat, Mus. No. 113065), from Tenmile Creek,
1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 15 mm.; maximum diameter,
13.5 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 35. Calliostoma grammaticum Dall (p. 618). Apertural view of composite of the final 2% whorls of an adult cotype and a
juvenile of 6 whorls (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113038), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.;
height, 13.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 13.5 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURE 36. Solariella laqita Mansfield (p. 621). Apertural view of specimen shown in figure 29. FIGURE 37. Calliostoma metrium Dall (p. 618). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113025), from 1 mile below Baileys
Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 20.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 20.5 mm. (After Dall.)
648

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LX

34 GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LXI

GASTROPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

PLATE LXI
FIGURES 1, 2. "Circulus" mitorrap'hes Gardner, n. sp. (p. 599). 1. Apertural view of holotypo (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350505), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 1.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.4 mm. 2. Basal view of holotype.
FIGURE 3. "Circulus" anthera Gardner, n. sp. (p. 599). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351632), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 1.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 3.8 mm.
FIGURES 4, 5. Episcynia mauryi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 601). 4. Basal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350510), from Oak Grove, Yellow River-, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 2.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.4 mm. 5. Apertural view of holotype.
FIGURE 6. "Circulus" anthera Gardner, n. sp. (p. 599). Apertural view of paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498022), from Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 1.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.6 mm.
FIGURE 7. Episcynia mauryi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 601). Apical view of holotype shown in figure 4. FIGURES 8-10. Teinostoma nanum eonanum Gardner, n. subsp. (p. 614).
8. Basal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351634), from three-fourths mile west of Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; height, 0.9 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.7 mm.
9. Apertural view of holotype. 10. Apical view of holotype. FIGURE 11. Solariorbis microforatis Dall (p. 615). Basal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113108), from 1 mile below Baileys
Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoirn County, Fla.; height* 2.3 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.7 mm. (After Dall.) FIGURES 12, 13. Teinostoma chipolanum Dall (p. 614).
12. Basal view of lectotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113101), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 1.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.3 mm. (After Dall.)
13. Apical view of lectotype. (After Dall.) FIGURE 14. Solariorbis microforatis Dall (p. 615). Apical view of holotype shown in figure 11. (After Dall.) FIGURES 15-17. Teinostoma mekon Gardner, n. sp. (p. 614).
15. Basal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498396), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 0.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.4 mm.
16. Apertural view of holotype. 17. Apical view of holotype. FIGURE 18. "Circulus" anthera Gardner, n. sp. (p. 599). Basal view of paratype shown in figure 6. FIGURES 19-21. Teinostoma phacoton Gardner, n. sp. (p. 614). 19. Basal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329124), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 0.7
mm.; maximum diameter, 1.45 mm. 20. Apertural view of holotype. 21. Apical view of holotype. FIGURE 22. "Circulus" anthera Gardner, n. sp. (p. 599). Apical view of paratype shown in figure 6. FIGURES 23-25. Cochliolepis arietina Gardner, n. sp. (p. 600). 23. Basal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 136081), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; height, 1.2
mm. maximum diameter, 3.2 mm. 24. Apertural view of holotype. 25. Apical view of holotype. FIGURE 26. "Circulus" anthera Gardner, n. sp. (p. 599). Basal view of holotype shown in figure 3. FIGURE 27. " Circulus" mitorraphes Gardner, n. sp. (p. 599). Apical view of holotype shown in figure 1. FIGURE 28. "Circulus" anthera Gardner, n. sp. (p, 599). Apical view of holotype shown in figure 3.
649

PLATE LXII
FIGURE 1. Crassispira loxa Gardner, n. sp. (p. 633). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497671), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 33 mm.; maximum diameter, 9.5 mm.
FIGURES 2, 3. " Drillia" haraldi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 635). 2. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 497670), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 12.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 4.3 mm. 3. Rear view of holotype.
FIGURE 4. Epitonium (Clathrus) alaquaense Mansfield (p. 577). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 373149), from U. S. Geol. Survev Sta. 12046, Vaughan Creek, Walton County, Fla.; height, 7.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 3 mm. (After Mansfield.)
FIGURE 5. Calliostoma exile Dall (p. 618). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113041), from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 6 mm.; maximum diameter, 5.5 mm.
FIGURES 6-8. Strombiformis (Polygireulima) makista Gardner (p. 574). 6. Apertural view of juvenile paratype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 483782), from 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 7.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 2.7 mm. 7. Apertural view of a specimen showing an unusually well-rounded body whorl (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 483782); height, 20 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.0 mm. 8. Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. 483782); height (estimated), 23 mm.; maximum diameter, 6.4 mm.
FIGURE 9. Smaragdia grammica Gardner, n. sp. (p. 607). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351640), from Shoal River, half a mile below Shell Bluff, Walton County, Fla.; height, 1.7 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.8 mm.
FIGURE 10. Natica (Natica) alticallosa Dall (p. 545). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112841), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 18 mm.; maximum diameter, 18 mm.
FIGURE 11. Smaragdia chipolana (Dall) (p. 608). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112664), from Chipola River, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 5.0 mm.; maximum diameter, 5.3 mm. (After Dall.)
FIGURE 12. Gelasinostoma chipolanum (Dall) (p. 612). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 113001), from Tenmile Creek, 1 mile west of Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; height, 1.9 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.9 mm.
FIGURE 13. Diodora chipolana (Dall) (p. 623). Apical view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112699), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.: height, 7 mm.; length, 15 mm.; maximum width, 9.5 mm. (After DalL)
FIGURE 14. Calliostoma flumenvadum Gardner, n. sp. (p. 620). Apertural view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351612), from 5 to 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 15.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 22.3 mm.
FIGURE 15. Lucapinella limatula (Reeve) (p. 622). Apical view of specimen (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 53881), from low water at Key West, Fla.; height, 3.0 mm.; length, 14.0 mm.; maximum width, 8.0 mm.
FIGURES 16, 17. Rimula woodringi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 624). 16. Apical view of holotype (Aldrich collection, Johns Hopkins University, from the lower bed at Alum Bluff, Liberty County, Fla.; height, 1.3 mm.; length, 2.7 mm.; maximum width, 1.9 mm. 17. Lateral view of holotype.
FIGURES 18, 18a. Dentalium (Antalis) chipolanum Gardner, n. sp. (p. 625). 18. Profile of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 329137), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; length, 40 mm.; diameter at anterior extremity, 3.3 mm. 18a. Cross section of posterior extremity of holotype, X6.
FIGURE 19. Cadulus (Gadila) spiniformis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 630). Profile of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351645), from half a mile below Shell Bluff, Shoal River, Walton County, Fla.; length, 8.5 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.2 mm.
FIGURE 20. Cadulus (Gadila) clarae Maury (p. 629). Profile of topotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 350513), from Oak Grove, Yellow River, Okaloosa County, Fla.; length, 4.9 mm.; maximum diameter, 0.9 mm.
FIGURE 21. Cadulus (Polyschides) lobion 'Gardner, n. sp. (p. 628). Profile of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498411), from 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Chipola River, Calhoun County, Fla.: length, 4.8 mm.; maximum diameter, 0.9 mm.
FIGURE 22. Cadulus (Gadila?) volvulus Gardner, n. sp. (p. 629). Profile of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 112754), from Chipola River, 1 mile below Baileys Ferry, Calhoun County, Fla.; length, 8.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 1.1 mm.
FIGURES 23, 23a. Dentalium (Antalis) diopon Gardner, n. sp. (p. 626). Cotypes (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498398), from 5 to 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; including the posterior extremity of an adolescent and the
anterior extremity of an adult; length of adult, estimated from broken specimens, 45 to 50 mm. 23. Profile of posterior extremity of adolescent cotype; diameter, 1.1 mm. 23a. Profile of anterior extremity of adult cotype; diameter, 3.3 mm. FIGURE 24. Calliostom.a flumenvadum Gardner, n. sp. (p. 620). Basal view of holotype in figure 14. FIGURE 25. Diodora pitmpellyi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 623). Profile of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 371889), from Gastropod Gully,
5% miles southeast of Bainbridge, Decatur County, Ga.; height, 7.4 mm.; length, 12.5 mm.; maximum width, 8.8 mm. FIGURE 26. Diodora daidala Gardner, n. sp. (p. 623). Apical view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 498397), from Whites Creek, 6.7 miles south of Argyle, Walton County, Fla.; height, 7.9 mm.; length, 18 mm.; width, 12 mm. FIGURE 27. Diodora pumpellyi Gardner, n. sp. (p. 623). Apical view of holotype shown in figure 25. FIGURES 28-30. Calliostoma rugabasis Gardner, n. sp. (p. 620). 28. Basal view of holotype (U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 351620). from 5 to 6 miles west-northwest of Mossyhead, Walton County, Fla.; height, 12.6 mm.; maximum diameter, 19.5 mm. 29. Apertural view of holotype. 30. Apical view of holotype.
650

GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 142 PLATE LXII

GASTROPODA AND SCAPHOPODA OF ALUM BLUFF GROUP.

INDEX

Page Acoetes lupinus Stimpson.... ............................. 600 Adams, Henry and Arthur, cited.......................... 606, 612 Adeorbis Searles Wood.................................. 598-599
aldrichi Maury ? ..................................... 601 striatus Searles Wood ................................ 599 supranitidus Wood ................................... 600 Agladrillia agla Gardner, n. sp......................... 636, pi. LV Alaba H. and A. Adams ..... ........................... 580-581 chipolana Dall .................................. 580, pi. LIV dodona Gardner, n. sp. ........... .................. 580-581 melanura (C. B. Adams) .............. .............. 580 Aklrich collection, Johns Hopkins University, species in...... 495-500 Amaltheacea, local distribution -of species of ................. 571 Amaura guppyi Gabb ..................................... 556 Amauropsis burnsii Dall .................................. 557 Ampullina fischeri Dall ................................... 556 Anguinella virginiana Conrad .............................. 584 Antalis H. and A. Adams ............................... 625-626 Architectonica "Bolten" Roeding ........................ 586-590 s. s. .............................................. 586-589 alvear Gardner ........................ 586, 588-589, pi. LVIII chipolana (Dall) ..............:........... 586, 587, pi. LVIII nobilis "Bolten" Roeding ........................ ..... 587 quadriseriata (Sowerby) s. s. ..... ..... ....... ... 586,587
waltonensis Gardner .................. 586, 588, pi. LVIII verecunda Gardner ..................... . . 586, 589, pi. LVIII (Architectonica) nobilis .quadriseriata (Sowerby) Woodring 587 (Episcynia) inornata (D'Orbigny) ..................... 601 (Phllippia) krebsii Morch ......................'.......' 589 (Pseudotorinia) bisulcata (D'Orbigny) ............... 586,590 (Psilaxis) verecunda Gardner .......................... 589 Architectonic!dae, description of genera and species of....... 586-590 local distribution of ................................ 497,499 Arene H. and A. Adams ................................... 612 Aspidobranchia, local distribution of species in ............. 497, 500 Assiminea, W. E. Leach ................................... 601 afflnis Dall ........................................ 602 Astraea "Bolton" Roeding ............................... 610-611 dalli (Maury) ................................ 610, pi. LX (Lithopoma) chipolana (Dall) .................... 611, pi. LX Astralium Link ......:.. ................................ 610 dalli Maury ......................................... 610 deplanatum Link . ................................... 610 sp. indet. Dall ...................................... 610 (Lithopoma) chipolanum Dall ......................... 611 Astyris aldrichi Maury ................................... 514 aldrichi nemoralis Maury ............................. 514 Dalli Maury ......................................... 510 perfervida Dall ...".................................. 510 trajectionis Maury ................................... 508

Buccinum inflatum Shaw

............................. 536

maculosum Chemnitz

.........................'.... 534

Bulla ficus Gmelin ...... ..............'............... 539

ficus Linnaeus .....

............................. 539

Bush, Catherine, cited .................................. 597,600

Cadulus Philippi ....................................... 628-630 clarae Maury . ...................................... 629 newtonensis Meyer and Aldrich ......................... 629 vicksburgensis Meyer ................................. 628 (Gadila) clarae Maury ....... ................. 629, pi. LXII volvulus Gardner, n. sp. ................ 629-630, pi. LXII (Polyschides) lobion Gardner, n. sp. .............. 628, pi. LXII
Caecidae, description of genera and species of .............. 582-583 local distribution of ............. .................. 496,499
Caecum Fleming .........:............................. 582-583 carolinianum Dall .................................... 583 chipolanum Gardner, n. sp. ..................... 582, 583, pi. L
695462 47 14

Page Caecum pararegulare Gardner, n. sp. ................... 583, pi. LV
sp. cf. C. carolinianum Dall .......................... 582, 583 Calliostoma Swainson .................................. 617-621
ceramicum Dall ............................. 617, 619, pi. LX exile Dall ................................. 617, 618, pi. LXII flumenvadum Gardner, n. sp. ................ 617, 620, pi. LXII grammaticum Dall ........................... 617, 618, pi. LX metrium Dall ................................ 617, 618, pi. LX rhombotoide Gardner, n. sp. . ................. 617, 619, pi. LX rugabasis Gardner, n. sp. ................ 617, 620-621, pi. LXII Calyptraea Lamarck .................................... 561-563 Candeana D'Orbigny ................................... 562 centralis (Conrad) .......................... 561, 562, pi. LVI crenata Gardner, n. sp. ...................... .562-563, pi. LVI grandis Say ......................................... 569 (Crepidula) cornucopiae H. C. Lea ..................... 564
lamina H. C. Lea ................................. 565 ponderosa H. C. Lea .............................. 564 (Infundibulum) concentricum H. C. Lea ................. 562 Calyptraeacea, local distribution of species of .............. 561-571 Calyptraeidae> description of genera and species of .......... 561-569 local distribution of ................................ 496,499 Cancellaria eucheea Gardner, n. sp. ................ 636-637, pi. LI I Cancellariidae, description of species of ................... 636-637 Capulidae, description of genera and species of ............. 569-570 local distribution of ................................ 496,499 Capulus Montfort ....................................... 569-570 chipolanus Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 570, pi. LVII Caricella (Atraktus) florea Gardner, n. sp.. .......... .637-638, pi. LII Cassidaria striata Lamarck ................................. 537 Cassididae, description of genera and species of ............ 536-539 local distribution of ..........................'..... 495,498 Cassis japonica Reeve .................................... 536 (Phalium) aldrichi Dall ............................... 536 Cerithiacea, local distribution of species of ................ 579-597 Cheilea Modeer ........................................ 570-571 dryas (Dall ms.) Gardner, n. sp. ............. 570-571, pi. LVII Chicoreus Montfort ................. .^ .............. 517, 520-523 Chipola formation, Florida, distribution of species in ....... 495-497 Chlorostoma Swainson .................................. 615-617 (Omphalius) exoleta Conrad ........................... 616 exolutum (Conrad) .......................... 616, pi. LX
limatum Dall ....................... 616-617, pi. LX sp. indet. ....................................... 617 Cibdezebina Woodring. ...... ........................... 604-606 Cinctiscala de Boury . ................................. 575,576 Circulus Jeffreys ....................................... 598-600 anthera Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 599-600, pi. LXI mitorraphes Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 599, pi. LXI trilix Bush ................ ......................... 600 Clathrus Oken ........................................... 577 Clavatula gunteri Gardner, n. sp. ................... 634-635, pi. LV Clypidella callomarginata Carpenter ........................ 622 Cochliolepis Stimpson ................................... 600-601 arietina Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 600-601, pi. LXI parasitica Stimplon .................................. 600 Collonia chipolana Dall ................................... 612 Colubraria Schumacher . . ................................ 534 sp. cf. C. Lanceolata Menke ........................... 534 Columbella lanceolata Sowerby ............................ 512 recurva Sowerby ..................................... 512 suffusa Sowerby ..................................... 501 Columbellopsis Bucquoy, Dautzenberg, and Dollfus ......... 501-510 Conrad, T. A., cited ................................ 562,569, 616 Cornell University collections, species in .................. 495-497 Crassispira laurentii Gardner, n. sp. ........... .r . ....... 634,pi. LV loxa Gardner, n. sp. ........................ 633-634, pi. LXII Crepidula Lamarck ............:....................... 563-566 aculeata costata Morton ............................ 563-564 spinosa Conrad .................................. 563 aesop Dall ................. n........................ 565 costata Morton . . ................................... 563 cymbaeformis Conrad ................................. 564 densata Conrad ...................................... 564
651

652

Page Crepidula fornicata (Linnaeus) ............... .......... 563,564
cymbaeformis Conrad '............................. 564 ponderosa H. C. Lea' .............................. 564 rostrata Conrad ............................... 564,565 plana Say .................................. 563, 565, pi. LVII protea D'Orbigny .................................... 565 recurvirostra Conrad ................................. 564 rostrata Conrad ...................................... 564 spinosa Conrad ......... .^ ............................ 563 virginica Conrad ..................................... 564 Crisposcala de Boury ............................... 575,576-577 Crucibulum Schumacher ................................ 566-569 auriculum chipolanum Dall ............................ 567 chipolanum Dall ................................ 567, pi. LVI dodoneum Gardner, n. subsp. ............. 567-568, pi. LVI constrictum conjuge Gardner, n. subsp.....'. 567, 568-569, pi. LVI grande (Say) .................................. 569, pi. LVI grandis Say ......................................... 569 multilineata Conrad .................................. 569 multilineatum (Conrad) ..................... 567, 569, pi. LVI planum Schumacher ................................. 566 waltonense Gardner, n. sp. ................... 567, 568, pi. LVI Crypta cornucopia (H. C. Lea) Conrad ......................' 564 costata (Morton) .................................... 563 cymbiformis Conrad ................................... 564 cymboeformis Conrad ................................. 564 densata Conrad .. ................................... 564 fornicata Lamarck ................................... 564 plana (Say) ......................................... 565 spinosa (Conrad) .................................... 563 (Crepidula) cornucopia H. C. Lea ...................... 564 cymbaeformis Conrad ............................. 564 densata Conrad .................................. 564 fornicata ? Say ................................... 564 plana ? Say ..................................... 565 Cryptonatica Dall ........................................ 547 Ctenobranchia, local distribution of species in...... 495-497,498-500 Cyclops angulatus Gabb ................................... 613 Cyclostrema chipolanum Dall .............................. 571 Cymatiidae, description of genera and species of ............ 533-536 local distribution of ................................ 495,498 Cymatium "Bolten" Roeding ............................. 533-534 (Lampusia) sp. .................................... 533-534 Cypraea Linnaeus ...................................... 540-542 chilona Dall ......................................... 541 europ[a]ea Montagu .................................. 542 heilprinii Dall ....................................... 540 tigris Linnaeus ...................................... 540 (Cypraeorbis) chilona Dall ...................... 541, pi. LIV heilprinii Dall .......................... 540-541, pi. LIV tapeina Gardner, n. sp. .................. 541-542, pi. LIV Cypraeacea, local distribution of species of ................ 540-543 Cypraeidae, description of genera and species of ........... 540-543 local distribution of ................................ 495,498 Cypraeorbis Conrad .................................... 540-542 sphaeroid(es Conrad ................................... 540
D.
Dall, W. H., cited. .517, 527, 536-537, 545, 551, 553, 556, 558, 560-561, 562, 564, 567, 571, 579, 580, 581, 582, 587, 590-591, 596, 604, 608, 611, 612, 614, 615, ,617, 618, 619, 621, -623
Dallimurex Rehder ....'................................. 523-524 De Boury E., cited ..................................... 576-577 Defrance, M. J. L., cited .................................. 624 Delphinula cancellata Gray ................................ 612
depressa Isaac Lea ................................... 615 duminyi Requien .!................................... 599 Dentaliidae, description of genera and species of ............ 624-628 local distribution of ................................. 497,500 Dentalium Linnaeus .................................... 624-628 disparile D'Orbigny .................................. 625 eboreum Conrad ..................................... 626 elephantinum Linnaeus ............................. 624-625 fllum Sowerby .............;...........'.............. 627 gadus Montagu ...................................... 629 haytense ? Gabb ...................................... 627 Haytensis? Gabb ..................................... 627 incertum Deshayes ................................... 627 leptum Bush ........................................ 626 matara Dall .............................'........:... 626 OTulum Philippi ..................................... 628 santarosanum Maury ................................. 627 sowerbyi Guilding .................................... 627

Page Dentalium trachea Montagu .............................. 582-583
(Antalis) chipolanum Gardner, n. sp. ........ 625-626, pi. LXII diopon Gardner, n. sp. .................. 625, 627, pi. LXII
(Episiphon) schumoi (Pilsbry) ...................... 625,627 (Graptacme) eboreum Conrad .................... 625,626-627 (Laevidentalium) santarosanum Maury ........... 625,627-628 Didianema Woodring ................................... 612-613 tytha Woodring ...................................... 612 waltonia Gardner, n. sp. .......................... 613, pi. LX Diodora Gray ........ ................................. 622-624 chipolana (Dall) .......................... 622, 623, pi, LXII daidala Gardner, n. sp. ..................... 622, 623, pi. LXII pumpellyi Gardner, n. sp. .................... 622, 623, pi. LXII "Dispotaea" auctores ................................... 568-569 Dispotoea multilineta Conrad .............................. 569 Distortio (Personella) septerndentata Gabb. ................. 534 Doliacea, local distribution of species of ................... 533-540 D'Orbigny, Alcide, cited ................................... 590 "Drillia" haraldi Gardner, n. sp. ................. 635-636, pi. LXII
E.
Episcynia MSrch ......................................... 601 mauryi Gardner, n. sp. ........................... 601, pi. LXI
Episiphon Pilsbry and Sharp .............................. 627 Epitoniidae, description of genera and species of ........... 575-578
local distribution of ............................... 496,499 ?Epitoniidae, description of genera and species of ........... 578-579
local distribution of ................................ 496,499 Epitonium "Bolten" Roeding ............................ 575-577
alaquaSnse Mansfield ...."............................ 577 (Cinctiscala) sp. ...................................... 576 (Clathrus) alaquaSnse Mansfield ............ 577, pis. LV..LXII (Crisposcala) sp. ..................................... 577 (Hyaloscala) sp. ..................................... 575 (Spiniscala) sp. ..................................... 576
virginiae (Maury) ............................... 576 Erato Risso ............................................. 543
chipolana Maury ..................................... 543 cypraeola Risso ...................................... 543 vitellina Hinds ...................................... 543 (Hespererato) chipolana Maury ............ ,........... 543 Eulima chipolana Maury .................................. 573 crassilabris Gabb .................................... 604 nemoralis Maury .................................... 574 scotti Maury ........................................ 573 Eupleura H., and A. Adams ............................. 532-533 pterina Gardner, n. sp. ..................... 532-533, pi. LIII Eurytorus Gardner, n. sec. ................................ 596 Euspira Agassiz ........................................ 551-552 rotunda Gardner, n. sp. .......................... 552, pi. LIX
F
Perminoscala Dall ....................................... 577 Ficidae, description of genera and species of ................ 539-540
local distribution of ................................ 495,498 Ficus "Bolten" Roeding ................................ 539-540
communis "Bolten" Roeding ........................... 539 eopapyratia Gardner, n. sp. .................. 539-540, pi. LIV variegata "Bolten" Roeding ...........................* 539 Fissurella limatula Reeve ................................. 622 Fissurellidae, description of genera and species of .......... 622-624 local distribution of ................................. 497,500 Fissuridea chipolana Dall ................................. 623 Fossaridae, description of genera and species of ............. 571 local distribution of ................................. 496, 499 Fossarus Philippi .*...................................... 571 adansonii Philippi ................................... 571 chipolanus (Dall) .............................. 571, pi. LVII florius Gardner, n. sp. .......................... 571, pi. LVII Fusus cinereus Say ....................................... 530
Gabb, W. M., cited ... ................................. 527,627 Gadila Gray ................................. .'. ......... 629-630 (?) Galerus parvulus Dunker .............................. 562 Gegania Jeffreys .............. ......'.................. 578-579
acutissima (Dall) .............................. 579, pi. LVII pinguis Jeffreys ...................................... 578 sp. indet. ........................................... 579 Gelasinostoma Gardner, n. gen. .......................... 611-612
<Dall) ............................. 612, pi. LXII

653

Page Globularia Swainson ..................................... 555-556
fischeri (Dall) .................................. 556, pi. HX Glyptanatica Gardner, new section................. i ...... 554-555 Graptacme Pilsbry and Sharp ............................ 626-627 Guppy, R. J. L., cited ..................................... 585 Gymnoglossa, local distribution of species of............... 571-575
H
Helix ambigua Linnaeus .................................. 571 decussata Montagu ................................... 603 haliotoidea [Gmelin in Roeding] Linnaeus ............... 552
Henderson, J. B., cited............................... 625,626-627 Hespererato Schilder ...................................... 548 Hippochrenes Zittel ........'...............'............... 560 Hipponicidae, description of genera and species of......... 570-571
local distribution of ............................... 496,499 Hyaloscala de Boury ...................................... 575
Idioraphe Pilsbry ...................................... 613-615^ Infundibulum centralis Conrad ............................. 562 lopsis fusiformis Gabb .................................... 604 Isapis H, and A. Adams .................................... 571
Myttonis Maury ..................................... 572 Iselica Dall ............................................ 571-572
myttonis (Maury) ................................... 572 psila Gardner, n. sp. ........................... 572, pi. LVII
Jeffreys, J. G., cited .................................... 578,599
Labellinacca Cossmann ................................... 551 Laevidentalium Cossmann ............................... 627-628 Lampusia Schumacher .................................. 533-534 Lea, H. C., cited ......................................... 585 Leiotrochus Conrad .................................... 619-621
distans Conrad ...................................... 619 Lemintina Risso ....................................... 584-585
cuvieri Risso ........................................ 684 granifera (Say) ................................. 584, pi. LV papulosa (Guppy) ............................... 585, pi. LV Liotia Gray ............................................. 612 (Arene) agenea Dall ......................:...... 612, pi. LX Lithopoma J. E. Gray .................................... 611 Litiopa Rang ........................................... 579-580 bombix Kiener ....................................... 579 melanostoma Rang .................................... 579 palaeosargassina Maury ...................... 579-580, pi. LIV Litiopidae, description of genera and species of.............. 579-581 local distribution of ................................ 496,499 Littbrina autiquata Conrad ................................. 578 Localities, list of ........................................ 493-494 Lucapinella Pilsbry ....................................... 622 Cornelliana Maury ................................... 622 > limatula (Reeve) .............................. 622, p}. LXII
M
Mansfield, W. C., cited .............................. 577, 592, 621 Marginella (Volvarina) eobella Gardner, n. sp. .......... 637, pi. LV Marglnellidae, description of species of...................... 637 Maury, C. J., cited. . . . .508, 510, 614, 518, 519, 525-526, 542, 543, 549,
572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 579, 610, 628, 629 Melanella Bowdich ..'................................... 573
dufresnii Bowdich .................................... 573 (Melanella) makista Gardner .......................... 574 Melanellidae, description of genera and species of .......... 572-575 local distribution of ............................. 496,499 spina Grateloup ..................................... 573 Mesogastropoda, local distribution of species of............. 533-607 Mirarissoina Woodring .................................... 603 Mitrella Risso ......................................... 501-512 alumen Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 508-509, pi. LII asema Gardner, n. sp. ........................ 509-510, pi. LII belonis Gardner, n. sp. ........................... 506, pi. LII blastos Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 506-507, pi. LIIdalli (Maury) ....................................... 510 , dalliua Gardner, n. sp. ........................... 509, pi. LII fiaminea Risso ....................................... 501

Page
Mitrella iscbna Gardner, n. sp. .................... 511-512, pi. LII mitrodlta Gardner, n. snbsp. ......... ; ........ 512, pi. LII
juncea Gardner, n. sp. ............................ 502, pi. LII mikra Gardner, n. sp. ........................ 503-504, pi. LII nanna Gardner, n. sp. ............................. 505, pi. LII eryzoides Gardner, n. sp. .......................... 504, pi. LII
oxia Gardner, n. sp. ............................. 507, pi. LII pedana Gardner, n. sp. ........................... 501, pi. LII perfervida (Dall) ............................ 510-511, pi. LII
megaia Gardner, n. subsp. .............:...... 511, pi. LII phagon Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 507-508, pi. LII photeina Gardner, n. sp. .......................... 503, pi. HI sima Gardner, n. sp. ......................... 505-506, pi. LII stikta Gardner, n. sp. ............................ 505, pi. LII trajectionis (Maury) ............................ 508, pi. LII tytha Gardner, n. sp. ......................... 502-603, pi. LII Mitridae, description of species of .......................... 638 Modulidae, description of genera and species of............. 581-582 local distribution of ................................ 496,499 Modulus Gray ......................................... 581-582 biconicus Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 581-582, pi. LV compactus Dall .................................. 581, pi. LV
willcoxii Dall ............................... 581, 582, pi. LV Monilia (Monodonta) exoluta Conrad........................ 616 Monodonta exoluta Conrad ................................ 616
klawahensis Tuomey and Holmes........................ 616 Montagu, George, cited .................................... 603 Morton, S. G., cited ....................................... 563 Morum "Bolten" Roeding ................................ 538-539
cancellatum Sowerby ................................. 538 purpureum Roeding .................................. 538 (Oniscidia) chipolanum (Dall ms.) Gardner, n. sp. .....
538-539, pi. LIV
Murex Linnaeus ....................................... 616-523 s. s. .............................................. 517-520.
blainvillei Payraudeau ................................ 529 chrysostoma chipolana .Dall ............................ 517 femorale Linnaeus ................................... 533 ficus Linnaeus ....................................... 539 incertae sedis .............................. 522-523, pi. LIII macropteron Deshayes ................................ 525 mississippiensis Conrad ............................... 518 pazi Crosse ......................................... 523 pecten Montfort ................................... 516,517 pileare Linnaeus ..................................... 533 pinuatus Swainson ................................... 524 ramosus Linnaeus .................................... 520
Rumphius ....................................... 620 scriptus Linnaeus .................................... 501 subulatus Brocchi \. ................................... 510 tribulus Linnaeus .................................. 516,517 trophoniformis Heilprin ............................... 520 tubifer Roissy ...................................... 526 vaughani Maury ..................................... 519 veatchi Maury .............................. T. ....... 532 Virginiae Maury ..................................... 525 (Chicoreus) aldrichi Gardner, n. sp. ........... 5J7, 521, pi. LIII
folidodes Gardner, n. sp. ............. 517, 520-521, pi. LIII pyknos Gardner, n. sp. .................. 517, 522, pi. LIII (Murex) chipolanus DaU ................ .\ ... . 517-518,pi. LJII dasus Gardner, n. sp. ................ 517,518-519,pi. LIII gilli (Maury) .................................... 518 nicholsi Gardner, n. sp. .............. 517, 519-520, pi. LIII vaughani Maury ................................. 519 Muricidae, description of genera1 and species of............. 516-533 local distribution of ................................ 495,498 Muricidea spinnlosa Heilprin .............................. 523 Muricopsis Bucquoy and Dautzenberg ..................... 529-530 heilprini Cossmann ............. .-. .................... 523 laccopoia Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 529-530, pi. LII

N

Narica? anomala C. B. Adams

.........................' 572

Natica s. s. ................. ..........'............... 545

brunnea Link ............ ......................... 548

canrena plicatella Conrad

......................... 545

glaucinoides Sowerby

......................... 551

guppiana Toula ......... ......................... 546

Judsoni Maury .......... ......................... 549,

mammillaris Lamarck .. . ......................... 548

sigaretina Lamarck

......................... 555

sulcata guppyana Toula ............................... 546

tectula Bonelli ......................................'. 547

(Adanson) Scopoli ...............................r. 544-548

654

Page Natica (Cryptonatica) floridana Ball ...................... 548
(Natica) alticallosa Ball .............. 544, 545, pis. LIX, LXII (Naticarius) precursor Gardner, n. sp. ..... 544, 545-546, pi. LIX [Nerita] sulcata Born.................................. 546 (Stigmaulax) guppiana Toula ................ 544, 546, pi. LIX
guppiana toulana Gardner, n. subsp. ....... 544, 547, pi. LIX sulcata Born ? ...................................' 546 (Tectonatica) mino Gardner, n. sp. ............ 544, 547, pi. LIX platabasis Gardner, n. sp. ................ 544, 548, pi. LIX semen Gardner, n. sp. ................ 544, 547-548, pi. LIX Naticacea, local distribution of species of................... 543-557 Naticarius Bumeril ..................................... 545-546 Naticidae, description of genera and species of.............. 543-557 local distribution of ................................ 496,499 Nerita canrena Linnaeus .................................. 545 Syncera hepatica Gray................................ 601 Vitellus Linnaeus .................................... 544 Neritacea, local distribution of species of................... 607-608 Neritidae, description of genera and species of............. 607-608 local distribution of ................................ 497,500 Neritina chipolana Ball ................................... 608 feuilleti Audouin ...................................... 607 Neverita Risso .... .................................... 550-551 Josephinia Risso ..................................... 550 Niso Risso ............................................ 574-575 aldrichi Maury ...................................... 575 eburnea Risso ....................................... 574 Nitidiscala de Boury ...................................... 577 Nodiscala de Boury ... ................................. 575, 578
O
Oak Grove sand, Florida and Georgia, distribution of species in 495-497 Omphalius Philippi ..................................... 616-617 Oniscidia Swainson ..................................... 538-539
oniscus Chemnitz .........*........................... 538 Onoba H. and A. Adams ................................. 606-607 Orthaulax Gabb .......................;................ 560-561
gabbi Ball ................................... 560-561, pi. LV inornatus Gabb ...................................... 560
Pachycrommium Woodring ............................... 556-557 burnsii (Ball) ............................. 556, 557, pi. LIX dodonum Gardner, n. sp. ..................... 556, 557, pi. LIX
Patella apertura Mont.(agu] .............................. 622 auricula Gmelin ...................................... 566 chinensis Linnaeus ................................... 561 equestris Linnaeus ................................... 570 fornicata Linnaeus ................................. 563,564 ungarica Linnaeus ................................... 569
Paziella Jousseaume .................................... 523-524 (Ballimurex) fusinoides Gardner, n. sp. ............ 524, pi. LII lychnia Gardner, n. sp. ................. 523-524, pi. LIII
Personella Conrad ...................................... 534-536 floridana Gardner, n. sp. ..................... 535-536, pi. LIII
Petaloconchus H. C. Lea................................. 585-586 sculpturatus H. C. Lea........................ 585-586, pi. LV
Phalium aldrichi Ball ..................................... 536 Phasianella afflnis C. B. Adams ............................ 609
brevis d'Orbigny ..................................... 609 Pilsbry, H. A., cited .................................... 622, 627
Sharp, Benjamin, and, cited ..................... 626, 627, 628 Pirula Montfort .......................................... 539 Polinices Montfort ...... v .............................. 548-551
albus Montfort ........... '. .......................:... 548 demicryptus Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 550, pi. LIX judsoni (Maury) ................................ 549, pi. LIX robustus Gardner, n. sp. ......................... -550, pi. LIX (Lunatia) hemicryptus Ball ............................ 550 (Neverita) chipolanus Ball ....................... 551, pi. LIX
eucallosus Gardner, n. sp. .................... 551, pi. LIX Polygireulima Sacco .................................... 573-574 Polyschides Pilsbry and Sharp ........................... 628-629 Pseudotorinia Sacco .................................... 589-590 Pseudotrochus Heilprin ................................... 581
turbinatus Heilprin ........*.......................... 581 Psilaxis Woodring ........................................ 589 Ptenoglossa, local distribution of species of................. 575-579 Pteronotus Swainson ..................................... 524
pinnatus Swainson ................................. 524-525 Pteropurpura Jousseaume ............................... 524-526
dryas Gardner, n. sp. ........................... 525, pi. LIII virginiae (Maury) .................................. 525-526

Page Purpura tubifer Bruguiere ................................. 526 Pyramidellidae, description of genera and species of......... 571-572
local distribution of ................................. 496,499 Pyrenidae, description of genera and species of........... . 501-516
local distribution of ................................ 495,498 Pyrula Lamarck ......................................... 539
Ranella (Eupleura) caudata Say ........................... 532 Reeve, L. A., cited ....................................... 622 Rhipidoglossa, local distribution of species of.............. 607-624 Rimella Aldrichi Maury ................................... 558 Rimula Befrance ..................................... 624
sp. ............:...............................:.... 624 woodringi Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 624, pi. LXII Rissoa Freminville ..................................... 606-607 decussata (Montagu) ................................. 603 Janus C. B. Adams ................................... 60S laevigata C. B. Adams ................................ 604 litiopaopsis Gardner, n. sp. .................. 606, 607, pi. LVII melanura C. B. Adams ................................ 580 phagon Gardner, n. sp. .......................... 606, pi. LVII striosa C. B. Adams ................................... 60S ventricosa Bemarest .................................. 606 Rissoacea, local distribution of species of................... 597-607 Rissoidae, description of genera and species of.............. 606-607 local distribution of ................................ 497,500 Rissoina B'Orbigny ..................................... 602-606 browniana B'Orbigny ................................. 604 chipolana Ball ....................................... 604 crassilabris Gabb ..................................... 605 decussata (Montagu) ................................. 603 inca d'Orbigny ...................................... 602 laevigata C. B. Adams .............................. 604, 605 vittata Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 602, 605, pi. LVII (Cibdezebina) browniana B'Orbigny. ............. 602,604-605 (Mirarissoina) juncea Gardner, n. sp. ......... 602, 603, pi. LVII
lepida Woodring ................................. 603 (Zebina) laevigata (C. B. Adams) ............'.......... 605 (Zebinella) chipolana Ball. .................. 602, 604, pi. LVII
decussata (Montagu) ....................... 602,603-604 Rissoinidae, description of genera and species of............ 602-606
local distribution of ............. .................. 497,500
S
Say, Thomas, cited ............................. 564, 565, 569, 584 Scala ferminiana Ball (Epitonium [Ferminoscala] ferminianum
Ball) ..... ........................................... 577 staminea Conrad ................................... 577,578 trigintinaria Conrad .................................. 577 virginiae Maury ..................................... 576
Scalaria antillarum de Boury .............................. 576 bicarinata Sowerby ................................... 578 clathratula Adams ................................... 575 crispa Lamarck ...................................... 576 frondicula Wood ? .................................... 575 pretiosa Lamarck .................................... 575 turricula Sowerby .................................... 576 turrita Nyst ......................................... 576 unifasciata Sowerby .................................. 577
Scalina Conrad ......... ; .............................. .577-578 communls Lamarck (Hanley) .......................... 577 sp. ................................................. 578 (Nodiscala) sp. ....................................... 578
Scaphopoda, local distribution of species in ................ 497, 500 Sconsia Gray .......................................... 537-538
paralaevigata Gardner, n. sp. ................. 537-538, pi. LIV Semicassis MSrch ..........................:........... 536-537
(Tylocassis) aldrichi (Ball) .................. 536-537, pi. LIV Serpula arenaria Linnaeus ................................ 584
granifera Say ........................................ 584 virginica Conrad ..................................... 584 Serpnlorbis granifera (Say) ............................... 584 papulosa (Guppy) .................................... 58,"> papulosus (Guppy) ................................... 585 Shoal River formation, Florida, distribution of species in..... 498-500 Sigaretus Lamarck ....................................... 552 chipolanus Ball ...................................... 553 (Sigatica) Boettgeri Meyer and Aldrich ................. 554 Sigatica Meyer and Aldrich .............................. 554-555 euglypta Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 554, 555, pi. LX Sinum "Bolten" Roeding ................................ 552-554 chipolanum Ball ............................ 552,553, pi. LIX

655

Page

Sinum dodoneum Gardner, n. sp. .................. 552, 554, pi. LIX

waltonense Gardner, n. sp. ................ 552, 553-554, pi. LIX

Siphodentalium tetraschistum Watson ...................... 628

Siphonodentaliidae, description of genera and species of..... 628-630

local distribution of ................................ 497, 500

Skenea trilix Bush ... ................................... 600

Skeneidae, description of genera and species of.............. 613-615

local distribution of..'............................... 497, 500

Smaragdia Issel ........................................ 607-608

chipolana (Ball) .......................... 607, 608, pi. LXII

grammica Gardner, n. sp. ................... 607-608, pi. LXII

Solariella Searles Wood ................................. 621-622

laqiia Mansfield .............................. 621-622, pi. LX

maculata Searles Wood ............................... 621

turritella Ball ................................... 621, pi. LX

Solaribrbis Conrad ...................................... 61*5

microforatis Dall ............................... 615, pi. LXI

Solarium Lamarck . . ................................... 586

bisulcatum D'Orbigny ................................ 590

granulatum Lamarck ................................ 587

chipolanum Dall ................................. 587

inornatum D'Orbigny ... ............................. 601

obtusum Bronn ...................................... 589

quadriseriatum Sowerby ........................... . . 587

semidecussatum Guppy .............................. 590

Spiniscala de Boury .................................... 575-576

Stenoglossa, local distribution of species of......... 501-533, 632-637

Stigmaulax M6rch ...................................... 546-547

Stimpson, William, cited ...............................

530

Strombacea, local distribution of species of................. 557-561

Strombidae, description of genera and species of............. 557-561

local distribution of .:.............................. 496,499

Strombiformis Da Costa ................................. 572-574

glaber Da Costa ..................................... 572

ischna Gardner, n. sp. ............................ 573, pi. LV

scotti (Maury) .................................. 573, pi. LV

< Polygireulima ?) chipolana (Maury) .............. .573, pi. LV

defuniak Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 574, pi. LV

makista Gardner ........................... 574, pi. LXII

parasites (Maury) ............................... 574

Strombina Morch ....................................... 512-516

aldrichi (Maury) ............................ 513, 514, pi. LII

nemoralis (Maury) ...................... 513, 514, pi. LII

ceryx Gardner, n. sp. ..................... 513, 315-516, pi. LII

lampra Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 513, 515, pi. LII

lissa Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 513, 514-515, pi. LII

tetrica Dall ......................................... 514

waltonia Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 513-514, pi. LII

Strombocolumbus Cossmann ............................... 512

Strombus Linnaeus ..................................... 557-560

aldrichi Dall ................................ 557,558, pi. LV

chipolanus Dall .......................... 557, 558-559, pi. LV

dodoneus Gardner, n. sp. .................. 557, 559-560, pi. LV

oniscus Gmelin ...................................... 538

pugilis Linnaeus ..................................... 557

Swainson, William, cited .................................. 617

Syncera Gray ...................'....................... 601-602

microgaza Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 602, pi. LVII

Synceratidae, description of genera and species of........... 601-602

local distribution of ................... ............ 497,500

T
Talityphis Jousseaume .................................. 527-529 Tectonatica Sacco ...................................... 547-548 Tegula exoleta (Conrad) .................................. 616
(Omphalius) exoleta (Conrad) ......................... 616 Teinostoma A. Adams .................................... 613
chipolanum Dall . . .......................... 613, 614, pi. LXI mekon Gardner, n. sp. ................... 613, 614-615, pi. LXI nanum eonanum Gardner, n. subsp. ............ 613, 614, pi. LXI phacoton Gardner, n. sp. ..................... 613, 614, pi. LXI politum A. Adams ................................. 613-615 (Solariorbis) microforatis Dall. ........................ 615 Terebra (Strioterebrum) psesta Gardner, n. sp. ........ .633, pi. LII Terebridae, description of species of ........................ 633 Tetrastomella Bellardi .................................. 510-512 Torcula Gray ........ ................................. 593-597 ?Torinia bisulcata (D'Orbigny) Tryon....................... 590 Tricolia Risso .... ........... ........................ 608-610 aff. chipolana Gardner, n. subsp. ................... 609, pi. LX probrevis Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 609-610, pi. LX

Page

Tricoliidae, description of genera and species of............. 608-610

local distribution of .............................. 497,500

Trivia "Gray" Broderip ................................. 542-543

chipolana Maury ..................................... 542

vaughani Gardner, n. sp. .................... 542-543, pi. LIV

Trochacea, local distribution of species of ................. 608-622

Trochidae, description of genera and species of............. 615-622

local distribution of ................................ 497,500

Trochita centralis Conrad .....................,........:.. 562

Collinsii Gabb ...................................... 562

concentrica (H. C. Lea) Conrad ........................ 562

(Infundibulum) centralis Conrad ...................... 562

concentrica Lea ................................... 562

Trochus argyrostomus Gmelin ......................... 615

conchyliophorus Born ............................ 561

conulus Linnaeus ................................... 617

costulatus Lamarck .......... -. .... . .................. 610

heliotropium Martyn ............................. 610

imperialis Gmelin .............................

610

longispina Lamarck ..........................

610

modulus Linnaeus .................................... 581

perspectivus Linnaeus .............................. 586,587

rusticus Gmelin . . ................................... 616

tuber Linnaeus ...................................... 611

Tuba Isaac Lea .......................................... 578

acutissima Dall ...................................... 579

alternata Lea ....................................... 578

Turbinidae. description of genera and species of............. 610-613

local distribution of ................................ 497,500

Turbo clathrus Linnaeus .................................. 577

cruentatus Megerle von Miihlfeld ....................... 612

exoletus Linnaeus ..................................'... 593

heliciformis Heilprin ................................. 616

pullus Linnaeus ..................................... 608

scalaris Linnaeus .................................... 575

"sculptus" Pilkenhorn ................................ 578

subulatus Donovan ................................... 572

sulcatus Pilkenhorn ....... .......................... 578

terebra Linna'eus ...................................... 590

Turritella Lamarck .................................... 590-597

alcida Dall ................................ 591-592, pi. LVII

bicarinata Gardner, n. subsp. ............... 592, pi. LVII

chipolana Dall ....................................... 597

gatunensis blountensis Mansfield .."............... 592, pi. LVII

indenta mixta Dall ................................... 596

mixta Dall ................'.......................... 596

segmenta Gardner, n. sp. ........................ 593, pi. LVII

subgrundifera Dall ......................... 590-591, pi. LVII

terebriformis Conrad ................................. 594

(Torcula) ? chipolana Dall ....................... 597, pi. LVII

dalli Gardner, n. sp. ........................ 594, pi. LVII

jacnla Gardner, n. sp. ................... 596-597, pi. LVII

mixta Dall ........ ....................... 596, pi. LVII

sp. ....... ......................... 595-596, pi. LVII

waltonensis Gardner, n. sp. ............. 594-595, pi. LVII

Turritellidae, description of genera and species of........... 590-597

local distribution of ................................ 497,499

Turritidae, description of species of ....................... 633-636

Tylocassis Woodring .................................... 536-537

Typhis Montfort ........... ........................... 526-529

alatus Sowerby ...................................... 527

obesus Gabb ..................................... 527

linguiferus Dall ............................ 526, 527, pi. LIII

obesus Gabb .......................................... 527

pterinus Gardner ..................................... 528

sawkinsi Mansfield .. ................................ 527

(Talityphis) alatus obesus Gabb. .......... 526, 527-528, pi. LIII

pterinus Gardner ....................... 528-529. pi. LIII

U
Urosalpinx Stimpson .................................... 530-532 phagon Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 530-531, pi. LII tribaka Gardner, n. sp. ........................... 531, pi. LII veatchi (Maury) ...................................... 532 xustris Gardner, n. sp. ....................... 531-532, pi. Lit

Vermetidae, description of genera and species of............ 583-586 local distribution of ................................ 497,499

656

Page Vermetus graniferus (Say)................................. 684
papulosus Guppy ..................................... 585 (Petaloconchus) sculpturatus H. C. Lea. ................. 585
Vexillum (Uromitra) triptum? Gardner ................ 638, pi. LII
Vitrinella C. B. Adams .................................. 597-698 excavata Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 597, 598, pi. LX helicoidea C. B. Adams ............................... 597
, seminola Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 597-598, pi. LX waltonia Gardner, n. sp. ...................... 597, 598, pi. LX
Vitrinellidae, description of genera and species of........... 597-601 local distribution of ............................ 497, 499-500
Voluta Jonensis Pennant .................................. 542 laevis Donovan ...................................... 543
Volutidae, description of species of ....................... 637-638

Page W Wagneria Heilprin ....................................... 560 pugnax Heilprin ..................................... 560 Woodring, W. P., cited...... 536, 556, 585, 589, 603, 604, 612-613, 630
Xenophora Fischer von Waldheim .......................... 561 laevigata Fischer von Waldheim......:................. 561 textilina Dall .................................. 561, pi. LVII
Xenophoridae, description of genera and species of........... 561 local distribution of ............................. 496,499
Zebinella MSrch ........................................ 603-604 Zeugobranchia, local distribution of species of............... 622-624

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR J. A. Krug, Secretary
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY W. E. Wrather, Director

I

Professional Paper 142

THE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA OF THE ALUM BLUFF GROUP OF FLORIDA
By
Julia Gardner

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON: 1947

CONTENTS
Page PART I. Prionodesmacea and Anomalodesmacea..................................................................... 1-79
II. Astartacea, Carditacea, Chamacea .......................................................................... 81-99 III. Lucinacea, Leptonaeea, Cardiacea ......................................................................... 101-149 IV. Veneracea ...............................................................................................151-184
V. Tellinacea, Solenacea, Mactracea, Myacea, Molluscoidea...................................................... 185-249 VI. Pteropoda, Opisthobranchia, and Ctenobranchia (in part) ................................................. .251-435 VII. Stenoglossa (in part) ....................................................... .............................437^91 VIII. Ctenobranchia (remainder), Aspidobranchia, and Scaphopoda ............................................. .493-656

ILLUSTRATIONS

Page

PLATE I. Map of northern and western Florida showing principal fossiliferous localities of the Alum Bluff

group ....................................... ...............................................

2

II-XV. Prionodesmacea and Anomalodesmacea .......................................................... 65-79

XVI-XVII. Astartacea, Carditacea, Chamacea................................................................. 97-99

XVm-XXIII. Lucinacea, Leptonacea, Cardiacea ..............................................'................. 143-149

XXIV-XXVIII. Veneracea ..................................................................................... 179-184

XXIX-XXXVI. Tellinacea, Solenacea, Mactracea, Myacea, Molluscoidea ...........................................241-249

XXXVII-XLVIII. Pteropoda, Opisthobranchia, and Ctenobranchia (in part) ....................................... .423-435

XLIX-LI. Stenoglossa (in part) ................................................................... ....... 487-490

LII-LXII. Ctenobranchia (remainder), Aspidobranchia, Scaphopoda .........................................639-650

m

