DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
FRANKLIN K. LANE, Secretary
UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
GEORGE OTIS SMITH, Director
PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 B
THE NEWINGTON MORAINE
MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS
BY
FRANK J. KATZ AND ARTHUR KEITH
Published March 15, 1917
Shorter contributions to general geology, 1917
(Pages 11-29)
WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 1917

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
FRANKLIN K. LANE, Secretary
UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
GEORGE OTIS SMITH, Director Professional Paper 108 B
THE NEWINGTON MORAINE
MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS
BY
FRANK J. KATZ AND ARTHUR KEITH
Published March 15, 1917
Shorter contributions to general geology, 1917
(Pages 11-29)
WASHINGTON
&0VERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1917

CONTENTS.
Page. Introduction............................................................................................ 11 General character of the region. ........................ , t ................................................. 11 Location and disposition of the moraine.................................................................... 12 General character of the moraine.......................................................................... 13 Local details............................................................................................ 14
Saco segment......................................................................................... 14 Biddeford segment............................................................. ..................... 14 Kennebunkport segment.............................................................................. 15 Merriland Eidge (Wells segment)..................................................................... 15 Morainal deposits' in South Berwick................................................................... 16 Morainal deposits in Dover........................................................................... 16 Newington and Portsmouth segment.................................................................. 17 Bye, North Hampton, and Hampton segment.......................................................... 20 Morainal deposits in Greenland....................................................................... 20 Hampton Falls, Seabrook, and Salisbury segment........................................................ 21 Newburyport segment. .............................................................................. 21 Observations by Upham. ............................................................................ 22 Observations by Sears................................................................................ 24 Other ice-front deposits of the region....................................................................... 24 Northward extension of the Newington moraine............................................................. 25 Southward extension of the Newington moraine............................................................. 26 Relation of the moraine to other Pleistocene formations..................................................... 26 Boches moutonn^es and till.......................................................................... 26 Marine sediments.................................................................................... 26 Evidence that the moraine was laid down in the sea........................................................ 27 Position of the moraine with respect to direction of ice movement........................................... 27 Becessional nature of the moraine......................................................................... 28 Discontinuity of the moraine.............................................................................. 28 Age of the moraine...................................................................................... 28 Summary-............................................................................................... 29

ILLUSTRATIONS.

PLATE IV. Map of New England coastal region from Plum Island, Mass., to Casco Bay, Maine .................. V. A, B, Gravel pit in Biddeford, Maine......................'..................................... VI. A, B, Merriland Bidge, Wells, Maine............................................................
VII. South side of railroad cut across Merriland Bidge, Wells, Maine.................................... VIII. A, West side of inner slope of Newington moraine on Bay Side road in Newington, N. H.; B, Sand
pit in Pine Hill Cemetery, Dover, N. H....................................................... IX. Map of parts of Newington, Greenland, and Portsmouth, N. H., and diagrammatic sections showing
relation of the Newington moraine to rock and till and^Pleistocene marine sediments............ X. A, B, Moraine gravel on New Boad, Portsmouth, N. H............................................ XI. Wiggins gravel pit, Portsmouth, N. H................................... v ........................ XII. A, Gravel pit on Middle road, Portsmouth, N. H.; B, Gravels and sand, perhaps of kame origin, in
Sunset Hill. Eliot, Maine ................................................................... FIGURE 1. Diagrammatic section of moraine and outwash deposits of Merriland Bidge, Wells, Maine............
ii

12 14 15 16
17
18 18 19
24 16

THE NEWINGTON MORAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

By FRANK J. KATZ and ARTHUR KEITH.

INTRODUCTION.

The nam0 here adopted is taken from the

The present paper embodies the results of brief studies in 1915 and some earlier observations (1911-1914) on glacial and associated deposits in Maine and New Hampshire. It is

town of Newington, N. H., in which the moraine is characteristically developed and forms a prominent topographic feature. The time of the Newington moraine will be designated the

preliminary in character, and the work was Newington substage.

incidental to more extensive and detailed GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE REGION.

studies of the Pleistocene geology of south-

western Maine and vicinity, which will be the The region in which the Newington moraine

subject of later publications.

is situated is a coastal lowland from 12 to 20

The fact that a belt of gravelly and sandy miles wide, bounded on the landward side by

ridges in southwestern 1 Maine and adjacent an upland that rises inland by a series of thor-

New Hampshire has the character of a terminal oughly dissected rock platforms or terraces.

moraine was recognized by the authors while The coastal lowland, which also includes sev-

they were together engaged in geologic recon- eral similar but lower terraces, is a hilly,

naissance. The moraine was first noted in heavily drift-mantled rock surface, rising from

Biddeford and Wells, Maine, and in Newington below sea level to about 300 feet above sea

and Portsmouth, N. H. Mr. Keith traced the level. The rock floor of this terraced surface

course of the moraine from Rye, N. H., to is thoroughly dissected into ridges separated

Newbury Old Town, Mass.; the portion in New- by wide, open valleys, some of which are in

bury and Newburyport, Mass., had been noted part worn to depths below the present sea

by Sears. 1 Mr. Katz subsequently studied level. Some ridges, for example the Bauneg

the moraine from Saco, Maine, to Rye, N. H. Beg Ridge, project from the upland terraces

The late Prof. C. A. Davis was for a time in the into the lowland area, and some monadnock-

field with the authors and contributed to the like rock hills or outliers of the higher terraces,

results here announced. His familiarity with notably Mount Agamenticus, rise above it.

the geography and geology of the region about The entire region has been rigorously glaci-

Portsmouth was of assistance hi tracing the ated and abundantly supplied with glacial

moraine.

deposits of many kinds. During part of the

Earlier geologic writings that are of interest glacial epoch the coastal terraces were sub-

as discussions of Pleistocene geology of the merged beneath the sea, but since then they

same region are limited to three Warren Up- have emerged. During the period of subsidence

ham's chapter, "Modified drift," in Hitchcock's marine clays and sands were deposited in the

"Geology of New Hampshire," volume 3; J. H. depressions, and these deposits are now to be

Sears's " Geology of Essex County, Mass.," seen as broad, flat areas only slightly dissected

cited by full title below; and F. G. Clapp's by a very young drainage system. Davis 3 has

"Complexity of the glacial period in northeast- shown that "The present shore line is therefore

ern New England." 3

not the direct result of submergence of a rugged

land, but of the emergence of an uneven sea

1 Sears, J. H., The physical geography, geology, mineralogy, and

paleontology of Essex County, Mass.,pp. 296,301, map, Essex Institute, s Davis, W. M., Physiography, in Grabau, A. W., and Woodman,

Salem, 1905.

J. E., Guide to localities illustrating the geology * * * of the vicinity

2 Geol. Soc. America Bull., vol. 18, pp. 505-556,1907.

of Boston, p. 5, Am. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 1898.

11

12 SHOETEE COJSTTEIBUTIOJSTS TO GEJSTEEAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

bottom uneven because the marine clays that Beginning at the north, the first is the Saco

were spread upon it had not been deposited in segment, in the western part of the city of Saco,

sufficient quantity to smooth over its previous Maine, on the north bank of Saco River just west

inequality."

of Deep Brook. It is a little less than a, quar-

The glacial and marine deposits have modi- ter of a mile long and trends southeast. Be-

fied and in general softened the relief of the tween the Saco segment and the next One, the

region and have deflected many of the streams Biddeford segment, is a short interval occupied

from the preglacial rock valleys. Neverthe- by Saco River and its flood plain. The Bidde-

less, the general trend of the principal drainage ford segment has its north end south of the

lines is now, as formerly, southerly to east- Saco segment, on the south side of Saco River,

southeasterly. The marine deposits increase in Biddeford, and extends south-southeast for

in breadth and thickness and indicate greater nearly a mile, and thence west of south along

submergence toward the north and northeast. the west side of the post road for 1-J miles,

The surface of these deposits now slopes south- finally turns southwestward and ends near the

eastward (toward the sea), and, furthermore, granite hills in the southern part of the town

the broad plains of marine clay and sand lie of Biddeford. Beyond an iliterval of 1J miles

at higher elevations in the northern part of the to the southwest, across granite hills, is the

region than in the southern part. There ap- next segment, the Kennebunkport, which is a

pears, then, to have been some tilting. These ridge H miles long with souuiwest trend.

relations, however, may be in part explained as About 7 miles to the southwest, across Kenne-

due to differences in the degree of filling caused bunk, Mousam, and Branch rivers and the

by differences in the quantity of material dis- flat lowlands adjoining them, is the WeUs seg-

charged into the sea at different localities and ment or Merriland Ridge. This ridge has a

in the distance of the several localities from sinuous course about 7 miles long, trending

the shore line and the sources of the materials. south for a mile, then swinging westward and

The Pleistocene marine sediments of this region finally southwestward and terminating about

and the associated problems of coastal move- 2 miles east of North Berwick village, against a

ments and delineation of shore lines are now massive hill of granite. About 2^ miles south-

being studied.

west of this point there is a small area of prob-

ably morainal sands and gravels. Two miles

LOCATION AND DISPOSITION OF THE MORAINE. farther south is the Knights Pond segment,

The drift formations here considered are distributed along a sinuous 60-mile course in York

a crescentic ridge inclosing the southeast end of Knights Pond, in the northwest comer of

County, Maine, Strafford and Rockingham counties, N. H., and Essex County, Mass.1 They lie nowhere more than 9 miles from the present Atlantic coast and in some places are adjacent to tidewater. Their distribution is

the town of South Berwick. The succeeding interval, measured to either the Dover or the Dover Neck segment, is approximately 8 miles across areas of ground moraine (till), marine clay and sand, and rock ledges.

shown on the accompanying map (PI. IV).

The Dover segment, including Pine Hill

The moraine does not form a continuous ridge but is made up of a number of segments,

Cemetery, in the city of Dover, is an irregular area from half to three-fourths of a mile wide.

more or less widely separated by intervals in which no deposits belonging to a terminal moraine have been found. Nevertheless, there is

This is separated by an interval of cla7 plain and till-covered rock hills, 1 mile wide, in a southeast direction from the Dover Neck seg-

a conspicuous alignment of the segments, as ment, which is a north-south ridge 2* miles

displayed on the map (PI. IV), which supports the conclusion that all are parts of the same moraine. The arrangement and extent of the

long between Little John Creek "on the north, Dover Point on the south, and Piscataqua and Bellamy rivers on the east and west, respec-

several segments and intervals are as follows:

tively. Across Little Bay, 1 mile south of the end of the Dover Neck ridge, is the north end

1 This region is represented on the following maps of the United States Geological Survey's topographic atlas: Portland, Biddeford, and Kennebunk, Maine; Berwick and Dover, Maine and N. H.; and Newburyport, N. H. and Mass. All these maps, except that of the Portland quad-
rangle, are of reconnaissance grade, and therefore too much generalized to bring out features like those described.

of the Newington and Portsmouth segment, which extends south about 2| miles a]ong or near the eastern shore of Great Bay, thence east three-fourths of a mile to Newington Town

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 PLATE IV

(Moraine ridges ofsand,
Outwash sand and gravel Moraines not correlated with the Newington, and gravel and sand ridges, possibly moramal Clay and sand horizontally stratified, containing a marine fauna and and eravel contemporaneous with and younger than the Newington
Sand plains and valley trains, outwash of later date than New
Roek "anchors" against which the moraine is deposited Blank areas chiefly rock and ground moraine
Geology fy fTJ.fta** and AJCeitA 4Z
MAP OF NEW ENGLAND COASTAL REGION FROM PLUM ISLAND, MASS., TO CA8CO BAY, MAINE, SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF MORAINE AND OUTWASH DEPOSITS.

NEWINGTGN MOBAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIBE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

13

Hall, southeast 3 miles to Portsmouth Plains, front was south-southwest for 11 miles to Mer-

south 1 mile to Peverly Hill, and south into the rimack River, with a slight easterly bowing.

swamp along Berrys Brook. The part of the South of Merrimack River its course has been

moraine between Newington and Peverly Hill traced for about 8 miles in a southeasterly

is shown on Plate IX (p. 18). The Rye, North direction, determined by the river, from Ames-

Hampton, and Hampton segment, beginning bury to Newbury Old Town.

south of Berrys Brook opposite the end of the GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE MORAINE. Newington and Portsmouth segment, extends

west-southwest through Rye Center and West The Newington moraine is a ridge ranging in

Rye 2 miles to Breakfast Hill, south and west height from 40 to 100 feet above its base and

of which, in North Hampton, morainal deposits in width from a few rods to a mile or more.

are irregularly distributed over a broad area of It consists of a western inner or ice-contact

several square miles. North of this area, in slope, the summit or moraine crest, and in

the town of Greenland, is an outlying moraine some places an outer slope with which is asso-

ridge If miles long from north to south. From ciated an outwash apron. These parts are

North Hampton the moraine continues south- not everywhere distinct. The inner side is

ward through Hampton village into Hampton generally steep, rising abruptly the full height

Marsb, north of Taylor River. The Hampton of the moraine from ground moraine or marine

Falls, Seabrook, and Salisbury segment begins clay plains. The crest, whether narrow or

in Hampton Falls, 1^ miles southwest of the broad, is nearly everywhere flat and approxi-

preceding segment, and extends south and mately level. It is hummocky in only a few

south-southwest through Seabrook and Salis- places, nowhere markedly so. It does not

bury to Merrimack River. The Newburyport exhibit the typical knob and kettle form of

segment begins in Amesbury and runs south- kame moraines, nor the rough surface of till

east across Merrimack River and for 7 miles in and boulder moraines. Where kamelike forms

a nearly straight course into Newbury village, have been developed, as in Newburyport,

whence it extends south-southwestward for a Kennebunkport, and Dover, and locally in

short distance to Parker River. The moraine Newington and Portsmouth, they are small and

has not been traced beyond this point.

subdued in form and relief. As a rule, kettle

The above-outlined disposition of moraine holes are few, isolated, and small. In New-

segments indicates that the ice front of the buryport and North Hampton, however, there

Newington substage from Saco, Maine, to New- are groups of good-sized ones. Where the

bury, Mass., a distance of 59 miles, had a gen- moraine does not lie against rock hills the

eral south-southwest course, though it was not outer side is a moderate slope descending to

straight. From Saco through Wells the line clay plains or merging into an outwash apron

indicated by the segments was nearly 15 miles or else a low scarp between the outwash and

straight southwest. Beyond Wells, through the moraine crest. Outwash plains were not

North Berwick and South Berwick, Maine, and formed everywhere, and some of them are not

Rollinsford and Dover, N. H., the front was distinct from the moraine. They are smooth

bowed 2 miles westward through another gentle slopes a few rods to 1^ miles wide and

stretch of 15 miles around the Mount Agamen- locally pass gradually in both slope and consti-

ticus mass, which was a barrier to eastward ice tution into broad flats of marine clay and sand.

movement. From Dover it swung southeast- Within a moderate range the moraine as-

erly for 8 miles through Newington and Ports- cends and descends with the relief of the floor

mouth into Rye, being held south of Piscataqua upon which it stands. Thus it rises out of the

River, probably by the influence of both the valley of Saco River upon the small rock hills

Agamenticus highland and the Piscataqua es- in Biddeford and descends again into the

tuary. This southeasterly stretch and the suc- valley of Kennebunk and Mousam rivers. In

ceeding west-southwesterly course of 4 miles in Wells and South Berwick it attains its greatest

Rye and North Hampton outline a small lobe, elevation of about 200 feet on the flanks of a

caused by the Great Bay depression. From large obstruction of high ground. Southwest

North Hampton the general course of the ice of this locality it descends to sea level in Pis-

14 SHOBTEE CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

cataqua River. However, the maximum dif-

BIDDEFORD SEGMENT.

ference in altitude of different parts of the moraine does not exceed 200 feet.
The materials of the moraine are boulders, gravel, and sand. With the exception of some of those at one place, all the boulders and pebbles observed are foreign to the locality of the moraine. A very small amount of stratified clay has also been noted in the moraine, but no till has been identified in morainal deposits of typical Newington form. Boulders are not abundant as a rule but have been found in considerable numbers in the north end of Merriland Ridge, Rye Center, and Greenland. Gravelly sand and gravel made up of large cobbles, small pebbles, and sand predominate in the moraine. These materials are all more or less washed and water-rounded. The outwash materials are gravel and sand, dominantly of small size, and are progressively finer toward the farther limit of the outwash.
The moraine has in many places a welldeveloped internal structure consisting of a sorting and stratification approximately parallel to the cross profile of the moraine. Beds that are nearly flat in the center dip outward into and constitute the proximal part of the outwash plain. In several places in Biddeford, Newington, and Portsmouth the inner side of the moraine is made up of beds dipping strongly and in part parallel to the surface slope. These "backset" beds are well developed in the broader parts of the moraine and were deposited during slow retreat of the ice. In places in Newington the moraine contains structureless,

Opposite the Saco segment is the north end of the Biddeford segment, also covered by clay. A broad mound of stratified sand overlain by marine clay on the north side of Main Street, Biddeford, is the northernmost recognizable part. Thence the moraine continues southeastward, rises above the clay as a gravel cover on the south-southwest slope of the rocky hill in the center of the city, and extends as far as Elm Street (the post road), where it forms a flat-topped sand plain that en the east in part abuts against higher granite hills and in part grades into a clay plain. From this plain the moraine narrows to an evencrested ridge which trends southwest on the west side of the post road for about a mile. This ridge is 160 to 180 feet above sea level, and from it the descent to the northwest is moderately steep for about 50 feet to a low area floored by rock ledges, ground moraine, and marine clay. On the southeast side, however, the ridge is only locally marked off by a low scarp and slight change in slope frem the bordering sandy outwash plain, which slopes gently southeastward and merges into a clay plain. The difference in slope and altitude between the two sides is a most striking feature in a view from the top of the moraine. From the post road the moraine turns westward and decreases in height. It trends toward the granite hills on the edge of the town of Fennebunkport but ends at the low pass immediately east of those hills.

unsorted sand and gravel. Irregularly dis- The make-up of the Biddeford segment is tributed patches of sand and gravel were noted disclosed in a number of gravel pits and sand

in Saco and Portsmouth.

banks from which material is taken for rail-

road, highway, and construction work in and

LOCAL DETAILS.

around Biddeford. Two cuts on the summit

SACO SEGMENT.

and the large gravel bank worked by th^ rail-

The moraine in Saco is very narrow and in- road on the northwest side of the high ridge

conspicuous; it consists of aligned sandy along the post road show that the material is

knolls almost covered by the sur.rounding clay made up of gravel and boulders packed in a

and sand plain. The ridge extends northwest sandy matrix without sorting or stratification

toward a till-covered rock hill, from which it is and at least in part lying on granite ledges.

separated by nearly half a mile of horizontal The material is all more or less waterworn and

sand plain. In two pits marine clay and over- rounded, and in the summit cuts it is iron

lying sand lie above the moraine material, stained and partly rotted. A sand pit near

which consists of waterworn sand, gravel, and the junction of the post road and the Alfred

boulders, not stratified but in pell-mell struc- pike, near the moraine border of the outwash

ture. Pebbles of moderate size predominate, plain, shows 20 feet of stratified and approxi-

although there are also numerous large boulders. mately horizontal sands. Pits in the north-

The materials in these pits are not weathered. west slope of the ridge and on the north side

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 PLATE V

A. UPPER PART OF PIT. Shows 15 feet of rudely stratified moraine gravel.

B. LOWER PART OF PIT. Well-stratified sand and gravel on inner slope of moraine. These sands are overlain by the gravel
shown in A.
GRAVEL PIT IN BIDDEFORD, MAINE.

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 PLATE VI

MORAINE FRONT AND OUTWASH, MERRILAND RIDGE, WELLS, MAINE.
In the upper view the moraine front is fairly smooth and not sharply separated from the outwash. In the lower view the moraine is scalloped and more sharply separated from the outwash.

NEWINGTON MORAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

15

of the Alfred pike expose 15 to 20 feet of sand the moraine springs from the south side of the

and gravel. (See PI. V.) This material is granite hills, against which on the north the

for the most part stratified and sorted, although Biddeford segment terminates. On the east,

but poorly so, and the beds dip strongly 35°- north, and west the Kennebunkport segment

45° W. that is, they are " backset" beds. The is bordered by wide plains of marine clay and

pebbles and boulders, the latter not uncom- sand. These deposits fill the valleys of Kenne-

monly 2 feet and rarely 3 feet in diameter, are bunk, Mousam, and Branch rivers, and ex-

almost1 all rounded. Although some of them cept for detached protuberant hillocks of

are somewhat polyhedral, like faceted pebbles rock and ground moraine they bury all other

or soled boulders, they have been so much formations. It is 7 miles south-southwest

rounded off that plane surfaces, other than across these'filled valleys, in which no termjnal-

joint or cleavage faces, are scarce. In these moraine deposits have been found, from the

exposures beds of sand or small pebbles con- Kennebunkport to the next segment.

taining a few scattered larger pebbles are overlain by gravel beds containing 4 to 6 inch

MERRILAND RIDGE (WELLS SEGMENT).

cobbles and many boulders. In all the gravel The moraine of Merriland Ridge is terminated

beds there is a closely packed matrix of sand at both ends by granite hills. The north end

and small pebbles.

springs from a small, low granite knob on

The prominent part of the Biddeford seg- Merriland River,, in the town of Wells, about

ment is the ridge along the post road. The 2 miles above the mouth of the river. From

southwest end of this ridge, which is low and this rock knob the moraine extends southward

inconspicuous, trends toward and terminates for a mile as a generally flat but in a small

near rock hills that are higher than any part way hummocky area one-fifth mile to 1 mile

of the moraine. The northeast end of this broad. Over this area are scattered numerous

ridge lies against the higher rock ledges in the large boulders, which, however, are more

city, and the morainal gravels and sands con- abundant on the western part of the broadest

tinue to the north as a cover on the flank of portion; the eastern part has fewer boulders

these ledges. The northern part of the Bidde- and is more sandy. Southwestward from this

ford segment and the Saco segment connect broad, flat part the moraine is narrower, higher,

rock hills on both sides of Saco River. It is and more sharply ridgelike, and from a point

clear that these rock hills determined the form about 1J miles north of west of Wells Beach

and position of the ice front and that the low station through a distance of 3^ miles west-

ground between them was the site of the dis- southwest the moraine is a prominent sigmoid

charge of the glacial drainage of Saco Valley. ridge which rises abruptly 40 to 50 feet above

Between the Biddeford and Kennebunkport low and wide meadows 011 the northwest. (See

segments is an interval of 1^ miles occupied Pis. VI and VII.) Through this distance it

by hills of granite that stand about 50 to 100 has a nearly level and generally smooth or

feet higher than surrounding areas. These gently undulating crest, at an altitude of about

hills for the most part are bare rocks, but in 200 feet above sea level. The crest is in some

places they have a drift cover, no part of which places only a few rods in width and in others

has yet been recognized as belonging to a several hundred yards. The southeast slope of

terminal moraine.

this part of the ridge is short, 10 to 20 feet

KENNEBUNKPORT SEGMENT.

high, and steep. It is in places somewhat irregularly scalloped or ribbed and breaks sharply

The Kennebunkport segment is a narrow into a very gently sloping outwash apron of

southwestward-trending ridge 1J miles long gravel and sand. In other places this south-

and for the most part only 30 to 100 rods wide, east slope is smooth and merges gradually into

though it widens to nearly three-quarters of a the outwash apron. (See PL VI.)

mile at its southwest end. It is made up of a The moraine is prolonged 1| miles farther

number of coalescent sandy kamelike knolls west, retaining its sharp ridge form. In this

and includes in its higher and broader southern stretch it approaches the nearly parallel north

part a few small rock ledges. This segment of slope of a large granite hill, against which it

16 SHORTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

ends at a point about 2 miles east of North territory north and west disclosed no morainal

Berwick village. Through this end of the deposits, but in South Berwick, at 2£ miles

moraine some ledges of granite protrude.

southwest of the end of the Merriland Ridge

The material constituting the northern part segment and on the west flank of the rock hills,

of this moraine is largely bouldery gravel. was found the feature next described.

Elsewhere, as seen on the surface, it is chiefly sand and gravel of moderate size. The only

MORAINAL DEPOSITS IN SOUTH BERWICK.

section found is the railroad cut through Merri- Ill South Berwick, If miles southeast of

land Ridge, the south bank of which is shown North Berwick village, there is a small arer, of

in Plate VII. The height of this section is sand and gravel that fills a saddle between rock

about 35 feet. The material in it is stratified hills. No distinctly morainal features were

small gravel and sand, with a little clay and noted here, but the position of this drift and its

relatively few small and large boulders. The similarity in character to the drift of Merriland

attitude of the beds, which is faintly indicated Ridge are suggestive of morainal origin. In

in the photograph, is in approximate paral- 1890 Leonard H. Davis 1 regarded this drift as

lelism with the front or east side of the moraine. a moraine.

The bedding has a low easterly dip under the Three to four miles southwest of this area

outwash plain and rises to a greater inclination of sand and gravel is the ridge inclosing the

under the crest, and then with lessened dip the south end of Knights Pond. This ridge h a

beds are cut off at the back slope. This atti- crescentic belt, convex to the south, of small

tude is shown in figure 1. The clay seam, contiguous sand and gravel knolls which pre-

Moraine crest

ft.R. level -~-C/3y bed
FIGURE 1. Diagrammatic section of moraine and outwash deposits of Merriland Ridge, Wells, Maine, showing the structure of the moraine.

visible as a dark streak at about the center of sent a continuous smooth, even slope toward

the section in the photograph, thickens very Knights Pond. There are no well-exposed

slightly eastward out to the limit of its ex- sections in this ridge, and consequently - its

posure, and on the west it thins and is replaced form and position with respect to the pond are

by coarse sand. In appearance and composi- the only evidence of its morainal character.

tion this clay is very much like the marine From Knights Pond to Dover, 8 miles south-

clay of the region in general. The entire out- west across the valley of Salmon Falls River,

wash apron along this part of the moraine there are no known terminal moraine deposits.

slopes down to and grades into the low, flat

MORAINAL DEPOSITS IN DOVER

sand and clay plains about the headwaters of

Webhamiet River.

Pine Hill Cemetery, in Dover, N. H., is on a

The continuation of the moraine was not roundish kanielike hill 150 feet above sea level,

sought in a southerly direction from the end or 60 to 70 feet above the adjoining plains of

of Merriland Ridge, because rock hills that are marine sediments. The hill extends east half

very much higher, culminating in Mount Aga- a mile to a higher rock ridge and has a sloping

meiiticus, 692 feet in altitude, extend for many southerly extension of 0.4 mile. A sir all

miles southward and occupy a large area in rock ledgo protrudes through gravels and sand

the towns of Wells, South Berwick, and York. 0.1 mile southeast of the summit of the hill.

The westward swing of Merriland Ridge at The higher central part of the nill is cornpored

nearly constant level against and around the of unsorted gravels of moderate size in a sandy

north side of this high rock mass indicates that matrix. A gravel and sand pit in the cemetery,

during the Newington substage the ice did not near the eastern limit of the kame area, ex-

ascend these hills. A reconnaissance of the

i Unpublished notes filed in the TJ. S. Geological Survey.

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 PLATE VII

SOUTH SIDE OF RAILROAD CUT ACROSS MERRILAND RIDGE, WELLS, MAINE. Stratified gravels, sand, and clay constitute the moraine and outwash.

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 PLATE VIII

A. WEST SIDE OF INNER SLOPE OF NEWINGTON MORAINE ON BAY SIDE ROAD IN NEWINGTON, N. H.
The flat surface in the foreground is sandy marine clay.

B. SAND PIT IN PINE HILL CEMETERY, DOVER, N. H. Shows irregularly bounded beds and pockets of sorted sands and fine gravel.

NEWINGTON MORAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

17

poses 15 feet of sandy material and has not cut across Fox Point and south along the shore,

through to the bottom. Plate VIII, B, shows rising abruptly to a height of 40 to 60 feet to a

a part of this section. Sand and fine gravel are narrow ridge at about 500 feet from the bay.

very irregularly interspersed throughout the A recent sea cliff 25 feet in height has been cut

exposed section except at the top, which is along part of this slope. The eastward descent

clayey and more evenly layered; small gravel, is gradual and smooth through one-eighth to

in which the pebbles are less than half an inch one-fourth mile to the level of the bay, or to

in size, is more abundant toward the bottom. flat plains of marine clay approximately 20 All the material is to some extent stratified, in feet above sea level. The materials making up

general unevenly so, and as a rule the coarser this ridge, as shown in cliffs on the shores and material is the more uneven. The photograph gravel pits on the crest, are sand and abundant brings out the irregular but sharp boundaries well-rounded gravel, generally of moderate

of the various kinds and grades of material. size but grading from small pebbles to large

This is distinctly kame structure. Upham 1 cobbles and containing also a few boulders.

refers to "the kamelike plain" of Pine Hill However, in the north end, where the moraine

..Cemetery and implies a connection between it directly overlies slaty rock, many angular

,,and the sand and gravel plains north of Dover, fragments of that rock are mixed with the

^which, however, are now believed to be out- gravels. South of the above-described section

,awash deposits of a later stage^,,

the moraine is very much broadened, owing

About 2 miles southeast of Pine Hill is the to the east-southeasterly trend of its outer

north end of the Dover Neck Ridge. This (easterly) border, whereas the inner margin

ridge is 2£ miles long, three-quarters of a mile continues southward for 1J miles. The prin-

wide, and 100 feet high near its north end, half cipal axis or crest of the moraine in this part

a mile wide and 130 feet high 1 mile farther curves from a southward to a nearly eastward

south, and about 100 yards wide and 40 feet trend toward Newington Town Hall. In the

high at its south end. The ridge is nearly part where the greatest width is nearly a mile

symmetrical except in the broadest northern the height of the moraine is 60 to 80 feet and the

part, where the crest is nearer the west side surface is hummocky, being composed of small

and the eastward extension has the form of an kame knobs and kettles. The material here

outwash plain. The surface of the ridge is for is gravel and sand, dominantly sandy on the

the most part smooth, although in places it is surface, and unsorted gravels and sand were

very slightly hummocky. The material seen seen in one pit. From Newington Town Hall

on the surface and also in small openings is the moraine trends east of south 1J miles along

gravel and sand. There are thin interstratified the Greenland road to Gosling Road. Its

seams of sand and clay covered by small grav- width is half to three-quarters of a mile, and its

els in a cut near the summit, and near by is a top is broad and flat and stands at an elevation

small ledge of slate. On the sides are vari- of about 100 feet. The descent to the west is

ously inclined sand beds which appear to grade fairly steep and about 20 to 30 feet high (PL

toward and are not topographically distinct VIII, A), but the eastward descent is less in

from the marine clay that fringes the ridge. amount and gentle. Near the town hall a rock

The eastward expansion at the north end is a ledge included in the moraine makes two small

sandy plain that slopes toward and merges into outcrops. Elsewhere the surface is sandy and

a flat plain of marine clay.

bears a few boulders. Unassorted sands,

rounded gravels, and small boulders are exNEWINGTON AND PORTSMOUTH SEGMENT. posed in a b'ank west of the town hall.

The moraine has been more carefully studied Plate IX shows the position and outline of the

in Newington and Portsmouth than elsewhere. moraine from Gosling Road in Newington to

Its form and constitution in those towns are Peverly Hill in Portsmouth. The westerly

described below.

boundary of the moraine in this length is sharp

Beginning on the shore of Little Bay east of and marked by an abrupt change in slope.

Fox Point, the moraine extends 1.1 miles In places, particularly near New Road and at

Peverly Hill, the morainal gravels present to

i Upham, Warren, in Hitchcock, C. H., The geology of New Hampshire, vol. 3, pt. 3, p. 153, 1878.

the west steep

walls

and buttress-like forms

70469° 17 2

18 SHORTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

that could have been made only by accumula- Along Middle Road the moraine trends east-

tion of the gravels against a retaining mold ward and is rather lower than the parts already

the ice front. In two places, however, at the described. Here its surface is composed of

inner margin of the moraine there are flat or irregular knolls of small size. Its limits are

nearly flat-lying sands and gravels, which sharply defined against rock, till, and clay sur-

are not distinctly separated from morainal faces on the south and a clay meadow on the

materials on. the one side and from low clay north. Portsmouth Plains is a flat expanse of

plains on the other. Although the exact sands and gravels making the crest of the mo-

nature and origin of these sandy flats has not raine, which north and east of Portsmouth

been determined, it seems probable that they Plains abuts against rock hills.

are the result either of deposition hi small From Portsmouth Plains the moraine ex-

bodies of water ponded between the moraine and tends southward for about a mile to Peverly

the ice after the ice had locally melted away Hill. In that distance it is comparatively low

from the moraine, or else of reworking and and narrow, and north of Sagamore Creek is

redeposition of the morainic materials by ma- made up of small knobs of sandy gravel includ-

rine waters that flooded the region after the ing a small, shallow, circular kettle. South of

withdrawal of the ice.

the creek the moraine is a flat-topped bench of

The summit of the moraine is about half a gravel and sand about 40 feet in elevation, lying

mile wide along Gosling Road, is smoothly against the rock mass of Peverly Hill. In one

level, sloping inappreciably east, and grades place through a length of 100 feet or more the

into a narrow eastward-sloping outwash apron. flat top of the plain does not quite reach the

South of Gosling Road the moraine is both rock, there being a small and shallow depres-

narrower and lower and is not distinct from sion or "foss" between them. The flat gravel

outwash on the east and a flat sandy plain on bench extends along the northwest side of

the west. Farther south, however, it rises Peverly Hill and is continued eastward in a

to a flat gravelly top 90 feet in elevation and 0.4 plain that surrounds the hill and descends by

mile wide on New Road. Here it has a steep moderate slopes northward into the Sagamore

west side, rising 50 feet out of a clay meadow, Creek marshes and by gentle slopes eastward

and a sinuous east border marked by a low to rocky hills east of Lafayette Road. The mo-

scarp between the moraine and its outwash, raine extends as a broad, smooth ridge of gravel

near which it is pitted by a few small kettle southward from Peverly Hill across Lafayette

holes. The flat top is continuous from New Road to Bellyhack Swamp (Berrys Brook).

Road southeast to Middle Road, a distance of Gravel and sand pits and road cuts give the

1J miles, in which it ranges from 1,000 to 3,000 following data on the constitution of the mo-

feet in width and descends from about 90 feet raine in Newington and Portsmouth:

above sea level to 75 feet. The western slope At the junction of Sherburne and Greenland

is steep but is in part mantled at its foot by a roads, hi Newington, in that part of the mo-

belt of sand on very gentle slopes. The frontal raine which has a high, broad, flat top, the 10

scarp is pronounced and 10 to 20 feet high to 15 feet of material immediately next below

in this reach but vanishes east of Sherburne the summit is gravel, for the most part well

Road. The outwash plain is continuous for rounded but containing also many boulders

4 miles from a point north of Gosling Road that have planed surfaces. The pebbles are

to a point a quarter of a mile northeast of not assorted as to size, yet there is a distin-

the corner of Sherburne and Middle roads. guishable succession of layers dipping about

It is an almost perfectly smooth surface, having 15° W., and of these the upper layers are more

a very gentle eastward slope, through which abundantly composed of finer gravel and snnd

there is a gradual transition from gravel and and the lower of coarser stuff.

coarse sand to clay. There is no natural In the same part of the moraine, at the junc-

boundary between this clay and the outwash, tion of Gosling Road and the Greenland road,

and there is no other basis for the line on the in Newington, an excavation of 3 to 4 feet in a

map than the limit of the wet, dead-level area flat sandy plain (1, PI. IX) contains fine yel-

of the clay plain.

lowish sand with relatively few rounded peb-

U. 8. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 PLATE IX

Base and

Frarft J.Kate

Moraine Sand'snA gravel j Outwash

Marine cl^y Marine cl&y

Morafne

Marine day

j Outwash Marine clay _

C

; Sand and ferayel i ;

!M

SECTION ALONG LINE A-

Rock and tffl

Rock and tm SECTION ALONG LINE C-D

MAP OF PARTS OF NEWINGTON, GREENLAND, AND PORTSMOUTH, N. H., AND DIAGRAMMATIC SECTIONS SHOWING RELATION OF THE NEWINGTON MORAINE TO ROCK AND TILL AND PLEISTOCENE MARINE SEDIMENTS.

NEWINGTON MORAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

19

bles or boulders and some rock fragments. The city gravel pit on Middle Road, Ports-

No stratification is shown.

mouth (6, PL IX; see also PL XII, A, p. 24)

On the Sherburne road hi Portsmouth, half shows stratified material consisting of gravel

a mile east of the excavation last noted, there and sand beds and intercalated clay seams that

are a pit (2, PI. IX) and a road cut which show have a southerly dip and are therefore "back-

approximately 15 feet, measured down from set" beds. The gravel consists of pebbles, for

the moraine surface, of large cobbles mixed the most part well rounded and under 6 inches

with small pebbles and sand, which are like the in size, but the number of larger and only

material in excavation 1, but without apparent partly rounded and faceted cobbles is consid-

stratification. One-eighth mile to the south is erable, and they show prominently because of

a sand pit (3, PI. IX), west of the Sherburne a lack of pebbles of intermediate sizes. The

road, in the place where the moraine ridge is sand and gravel are loose and friable, but the

low and not distinct from the outwash plain. clayey seams are stiff and project from the

Here, the flat sandy top of the ridge shows 3 face of the bank.

feet of yellow sand containing much dust and On Peverly Hill Road low gravel banks (7

fine claylike rock flour, scattered pebbles 2 and 8, PL IX) show loose gravels and sands

inches or less in diameter, and a few cobbles mostly unsorted and unstratified. A small

as large as 6 inches. This material is dievoid of cut on the north side of the road exposed in

stratification and hence is not outwash but 1914 a vertical section of 8 to 10 feet of well-

morainic dump.

stratified small gravel, sand, and sandy clay,

In the cut on New Road (4, PI. IX; see also dipping 30° W. and about parallel to the sur-

PL X), at the west edge of the flat-topped face of the moraine; the upper 3 to 4 feet was

moraine crest, there are exposed 10 to 12 feet gravel and the lower part sand. A lens of

of boulders and coarse gravel packed in fine finely laminated clayey sand lay between

gravel and sand, without clay or other ce- gravel beds near the top of the section, and

menting material. The material here, as in these beds were in abrupt discordant contact

all but one other exposure, that near Little with unsorted gravels that were a]! strongly

Bay, is dominantly of foreign origin, being iron-stained to the full depth of the exposure.

composed chiefly of granite gneiss, pegmatites, Many of the pebbles had the form of faceted

basaltic porphyries, and much fine-grained mi- blocks whose edges and planes had been some-

caceous graywacke gneiss, such as are not what rounded. Immediately above this pit,

indigenous to the coastal towns of New Hamp- in the flat summit of the moraine, where it

shire. Although there are many faceted boul- lies against Peverly Hill, is another pit (10,

ders and pebbles, the dominant forms are PL IX) 8 to 10 feet deep, which shows evenly

round and subrounded, and none of them are stratified, approximately horizontal sand and

striated. All the materials are surficially more fine gravel lying on rounded glaciated ledges.

or less iron-stained, giving to the bank as a A short distance southwest of Peverly Hill,

whole a light rusty-brown color, and many of near the inner edge of the moraine, there is a

the pebbles and boulders are rotted. A small shallow cut (12, PL IX), showing small

part of the west end of this exposure (PL X, A), rounded gravel and sand, stratified and dip-

through a thickness of 3 to 4 feet at the top, ping southwest, resting against glaciated

shows a faint trace of stratification parallel to ledges. The city gravel pit on Lafayette

the back slope of the moraine (' 'backset" Road (the Boston post road) near Sagamore

beds).

Creek (11, PL IX) contains about 20 feet of

In the Wiggins gravel pit, near Middle and stratified gravels and sand.

Sherburne roads, in Portsmouth (5, PL IX; see The continuation of the moraine southward

also PL XI), there are undulating beds of inter- from the part shown in Plate IX has not been

stratified clean sands and fine gravels which closely studied. It is, however, known south

abut directly against unsorted coarse rusty of Berrys Brook in Portsmouth and Rye. In

gravels lightly packed with sandy material but Rye Center the moraine is a prominent boulder

not cemented. Weathering has produced a and gravel ridge, which is narrow and has

black rust varnish on pebbles and boulders steep sides, but it broadens and rises to the

and has rotted the gabbroid rocks.

southwest, where it abuts against a rock butte

20 SHORTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

east of West Rye. Thence the gravel ridge between the flat-topped moraine and the val-

runs westward to Breakfast Hill, which is leys at the west is best seen in the village of

essentially a rock ledge but is partly mantled North Hampton, where the moraine forrrs a

by the morainic materials. These materials westward-facing scarp of nearly 40 feet.

are exposed in cuts along Lafayette Road, Hummocky moraines, till ridges, or kames

where they consist of stratified waterworn have not been found in this segment of the

gravel and sand having a southerly dip. The moraine. In the western corner of Rye, w] ^re

moraine continues in a southerly direction the moraine turns southward, a rock hill

from Breakfast HiU as a sandy gravel ridge projects 20 or 30 feet above the plain level and

with broad plainlike top extending to Hamp- appears to have formed an anchor for the ice.

ton village.

Numerous other ledges project through the1

RYE, NORTH HAMPTON, AND HAMPTON SEGMENT.

moraine, rising as high as any of its parts, a^

for instance in Hampton village.

*

The portion of the moraine lying in Rye, The two terraces or benches mentioned above

North Hampton, and Hampton forms a flat- are formed by layers of hard gravel between tfife

topped ridge running westward from Rye sandy portions t>f the morainal deposit. Al-

almost to Greenland depot and thence south- though there are numerous minor exposure0 of

ward through North Hampton and Hampton, these beds, there are no complete sections. A

where it slopes southward and passes under small pit at the west end of North Hampton

Hampton Marsh. The morainal deposits of shows about 20 feet of gravelly sand vdth

Greenland, described below, may be an out- waterworn pebbles. Usually the surfacer of

lying part of this segment. North and west the plains or terraces are sandy with scattered

of this segment lie low valleys along the heads small pebbles, and as a rule even a small cutting

of Berrys Brook and Taylor River, and the moraine stands above them with a welldefined scarp. These bounding valleys are

below these surfaces exposes gravel. In general the amount of, gravel appears to be so'newhat greater in Hampton than it is farther

floored in the main with rock covered with a thin coating of till and marine clay. Surfaces

south or east. The sections observed showed sorting and rough bedding of the.materials -

of this character practically surround the outlier near by in Greenland. The morainal

MORAINAL DEPOSITS IN GREENLAND.

ridge slopes gently eastward and merges very In Greenland, N. H., there are two areas of

irregularly iiitQ the low till slopes with numer- morainal deposits that extend south from the

ous rock ledges that extend to the sea.

center of Greenland village along a coTirse

Most of the ridge is more than 100 feet above marked by the highway to North Hampton

the sea, as is also the Greenland section. The village. They are about 2 miles west of the

two highest points are a mile north of North Newington moraine in Portsmouth and, taken

Hampton village and in Hampton village. In together, are in a general way parallel tc it,

outward form the morainal deposits of these but they also trend toward the broad area of

towns are nearly everywhere outwash plains, morainal deposits in North Hampton, as if

made up of two distinct benches or terraces, they formed a protrusion from that area. The

from 15 to 20 feet apart, both of which are deposit in Greenland village forms a broad,

well seen in North Hampton and Hampton. flat-topped ridge that descends to a narrow sag

In most places these terraces or plains have about half a mile south of the village wl^ich

little visible slope, but locally they have a separates the northern from the southern p<\rt.

decided dip. This dip is best seen about a mile The moraine rises southward rather steeply

south of North Hampton village and also in from this sag to a narrow, flat-topped ridge

the southerly part of Hampton village, where about 125 feet above sea level and 1J nriles

the plain slopes southward under the marsh. long in a south-southwest direction. The vest

The westward scarp is usually to be seen and side of the moraine is a short and steep slope

marks well the old position of the ice front. toward the low clay plain of Winnicut River,

Along or near this are numerous kettle holes, a but the opposite side is a broad and gentle

fine group of them appearing hall a mile north sandy wash slope which merges into the clay

of North Hampton village. The contrast plains on the east.

NEWINGTON MORAINE, MAINE, STEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

21

Upham x describes the morainal deposits in Salisbury, and there are also wide stretches of

Greenland as a "kame." He says:

well-developed plain in Seabrook. Although

The academy in Greenland is built on a broadly rounded, these plains are in general nearly horizontal, kamelike ridge of gravel, which at a short distance to the there are locally strong dips for instance, 1

southwest becomes a nearly level plain 40 or 50 rods wide mile southwest of South Seabrook, where

[Greenland Parade] but still farther to the southwest is there is a marked dip to the southeast. In

narrowed to a typical kame. The length of this deposit is a half mile. Its height is nearly 100 feet above the sea.

Salisbury and East Salisbury there is a gentle

At a schoolhouse half a mile south from the academy though not obvious dip which results in the

we rise to a plain about 125 feet above the sea, which ex- disappearance of the plain below the level of

tends a mile to the south and southeast, descending with the salt marshes. Rock outcrops are compara-

a gentle slope 25 to 40 feet in that distance. This plain tively common in these lower portions of the

forms the highest land between Winnicut River and Berrys Brook. Its northwest portion is quite thickly

sand plains,

but there seems to be no causal

strewn with boulders, the largest of which are 5 or 6 feet relation between the position of the rock sur-

in diameter, and over nearly its whole extent these have face and the plain.

been sufficiently abundant for walling the fields. Four The deposits of the sand and gravel plains

wells, however, between the schoolhouse and the Eastern of this segment lie in three benches or terraces,

depot [Greenland depot, on the Eastern division of the Boston & Maine Railroad], varying from 20 to 30 feet in

at

the

edges

of which

hard

beds

of

gravel

depth, passed all the way through stratified gravel, sand, appear. Two of these benches are seen in

and blue clay. In three of these wells the upper portion most of Seabrook and in the northern part of

was fine gravel or sand. One of them, a half mile south- Salisbury. The third bench is seen only in

east, and a cistern a quarter of a mile south from the northern Salisbury about a mile west and

schoolhouse, showed at the top 10 feet of very coarse but waterworn gravel, which was underlain by clear sand.

southwest of South Seabrook. The lower two benches are about 20 feet apart; the upper two

The moraine in Greenland marks a halt of are about 15 feet apart and are separated by a

the ice at a short distance back from the small heavy bed of fine white sand that is well exposed

lobe of the Newington moraine in Rye and is near the water tower a mile southwest of South

seemingly very little younger. *

Seabrook. The gravel is usually fine and

makes a smaller proportion of the morainal

HAMPTON FALLS, SEABROOK, SEGMENT.

AND SALISBURY

deposits

than

the

gravels

of

the

Rye

and

Hampton segment. The gravels appear to

Morainal deposits of the next segment con- rest upon marine clay along the edge of the

sist almost wholly of outwash sand and gravel marsh at East Salisbury and also along the

plains except in Hampton Falls, where a small small brook about a mile northwest of East

ridge of till is exposed. This ridge starts in the Salisbury.

center of the village and runs southwest for nearly a mile. Along its western border the

NEWBURYPORT SEGMENT.

sand plains of this segment pass very irregu- The next segment of the moraine runs south-

larly between a group of till-covered rock hills eastward from Amesbury through Newbury-

and drumlins in the town of Salisbury, Mass. port to Parker River in Newbury. Most of

In Seabrook, N. H., the moraine is bordered on this segment is separated from the Salisbury

the wes.t by the low valley of Hampton Falls segment by Merrimack River and the adjacent

River, which is underlain mainly by till with marshes. During the formation of this part of

scattered rock ledges. Eastward the sand- the moraine, however, the sand outwash plains

plain surfaces pass beneath the marshes of probably extended northeastward into those

Salisbury and Hampton, except for a small of the south end of the Salisbury segment.

area in South Seabrook, where till with scat- The moraine in this segment in general takes

tered rock ledges rises a little above the general the form of a distinct ridge bordered by gently

surface of the sand plain.

sloping sand plains on the northeast. The New-

The sand-plain characteristics are very well buryport ridge is for most of its length flanked

marked, especially between Salisbury and East on the southwest by a low valley containing

i Upham, Warren, op. clt., pp. 162-163.

numerous rock outcrops or rocky hummocks

22 SHORTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

thinly covered with till. In its northwestern railroad the moraine stands above the outwash

part, however, the moraine abuts against a plain and is set off from it by an abrupt frortal

high rocky ridge through which the Merrimack scarp, which in places is 15 to 20 feet in height

has cut its course, thus separating about a and is slightly sinuous or scalloped in trend

mile of the moraine from the main part in where best developed. To the northwest p,nd

Newburyport.

the southeast there is less and in many places

This segment of the moraine varies much in no topographic distinction between the mo-

height. At its northwest end it forms a group raine crest and the outwash. In the form of

of kames about 150 feet above the sea. These its slopes and in its relation to low meadows on

diminish in height within a short distance and the one side and higher, gently sloping sr.nd

pass southward and southeastward into a well- plains on the other side, the Newburyport ridge

developed sand plain ("Grasshopper Plains") presents features almost identical with those

about 100 feet above sea level, which fills in of Merriland Ridge and the moraine in Bid de-

the area between the rock ridge above men- ford. The moraine in Newburyport extends,

tioned and the morainic ridge.

diminishing in width and height, to the drum-

"Grasshopper Plains" has a broad, nearly lins in Newbury and appears also on the south-

level surface of more than 1 square mile, which east side of these drumlins as a narrow gravel

is markedly pitted near High Street in New- terrace from 10 to 20 feet above sea level.

buryport by kettle holes ranging from a few The moraine is composed entirely of srnd

yards to 200 and 300 yards across and reaching and gravel in this segment. The materials are

40 or 50 feet in depth. The smaller kettle not now well exposed at any point, but a thick-

holes are round and regular in shape but some ness of about 40 feet is shown in the railroad

of the largest are less regular and have hum- cuts in the city of Newburyport. Upham re-

mocky and ridged bottoms. From " Grass- ports that wells in Newburyport show a maxi-

hopper Plains" southwestward through New- mum depth of 90 feet of sand and gravel. The

buryport the moraine is a narrow ridge with a materials are waterworn and appear from the

definite southwestward-facing ice-contact scarp poor exposures to be stratified, with, gertle

30 to 50 feet in height. Part of this scarp, be- northeasterly dips. A gravel pit just north-

tween 1 mile and If miles west of the railroad, east of the drumlins of Newbury shows about

is comparatively steep and is notably ribbed, 20 feet of sand and gravel in which the pebbles

with deep and sharp reentrants toward the are as much as 6 inches in diameter. The beds

north and northeast between the ribs, resem- are roughly stratified and approximately hori-

bling the buttressed forms on the ice-contact zontal, and they rest directly on large ledges1 of

side of parts of the moraine in Newington. bedrock. No bedrock projects through the mo-

Elsewhere this slope, although smoother and raine except at the border of the high send

less steep, is well marked for a distance of over plain in the western part of Newburyport end

4 miles, to the point where the ice front turned also at the turn of the moraine next to the

southwestward around the drumlins in the drumlins in Newbury. At these two localities

village of Newbury. In that distance its the bedrock hills seem to have checked the ad-

summit diminishes gradually in altitude from vance of the ice.

80 feet above sea level at the northwest to 20

OBSERVATIONS BY UPHAM.

feet at the southeast. The crest of the moraine

lies along and for the most part south of High Upham 1 made the following observations on

Street in Newburyport. It is in general a the features herein described as the Newington

smoothly shaped ridge decreasing gradually in moraine and on associated deposits in New

height toward the southeast, but in it there are Hampshire. It must be remembered in read-

several large kettle holes. On the northeast ing these extracts that the term "kame" as

side the morainic ridge is bordered by an out- used by Upham in 1878 connoted deposits tl at

wash plain of sand which slopes eastward (in were supposed to have been laid down by

part northeastward to the tidal basin of Merri- streams flowing between retaining walls of gla-

mack River). ' Through a distance of 2 miles cial ice that is, in crevasses or between ice

between "Grasshopper Plains" and the freight

'• Op. cit., pp. 150,155-156,164, and 170-172.

NEWINGTON MOKAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

23

lobes or between an ice wall and a valley terminates southeast from the Eastern Railroad in a small

wall from which the ice had withdrawn.

plain of horizontally stratified sand. * * * Modified drift along the seacoast.—The oldest and most

In Newington and Portsmouth a kamelike plain of gravel prominent deposits of modified drift near our coast are

and sand is the highest land between Great Bay and the kamelike hills, elevated plains, and broad ridges, com-

Piscataqua River, but their shores, with the islands of posed of gravel, sand, and clay. * *< * The gently slop-

this river below Portsmouth, are almost everywhere gently ing hill on which Rye village is situated, nearly 100 feet

sloping hills of till or ledge.

above the sea, is mainly stratified gravel from 25 to 40 feet

Marine shells and other organic remains have been in depth. It is coarse for the first 10 feet, with the largest

found in the lower portions of this valley [Piscataqua pebbles a foot in diameter; below, it is fine but has little

basin], showing that the ocean stood at a higher level clear sand. The character of these deposits will be seen

when the modified drift in which they occur was from the following sections of wells, 1 to 1J miles southwest

deposited. * * *

from Rye village, on the watershed south of Berrys

Kames and kamelike plains about Dover and southward.— Brook, and about 100 feet above the sea:

Near the coast from Dover to Newburyport are'frequently 1. At J. Philbrick's (county map) [on the northwest side

found massive kamelike deposits, consisting of high plains of Washington Road, 1.05 mile west of Rye Center], said to

or broadly rounded ridges of gravel and sand, which often be the deepest well in Rye, coarse gravel, 25 feet; - sandy,

form watersheds between wide valleys 100 to 200 feet gray clay, very compact, free from pebbles, 28 feet; total

below. The absence in these valleys of the terraces which depth, 53 feet. The only rock found in the clay was an

mark erosion through modified drift shows that they were angular block weighing about 200 pounds, 40 feet below

never filled with the same materials and that these re- the surface.

markable plains and ridges were deposited in their present 2. Near L. Brown's [on the northwest side of Washington

isolated position, with wide areas of lower land at each Road, 1.15 miles west of Rye Center], coarse gravel, 8 feet;

side. How this took place we can only explain by refer- sand, 8 inches; coarse gravel, 6 feet; very coarse gravel, 10

ring the formation of these deposits to the same causes feet, much of it composed of rounded rocks of nearly/ uni-

which produced the kames. The ice sheet still remained form size, about a foot in diameter, with scarcely any earth,

unmelted upon each side at the time of their deposi- so that "one could look down among the pebbles;" ordi-

tion, filling the valleys and wide areas of lowland, over nary gravel, with layers of sand, 20 feet, resting on ledge;

which this gravel and sand must otherwise have been total depth, 45 feet.

spread by the current of the floods on which they were 3. At R. Shapley's [about 1.4 miles S. 65° W. of Rye

brought.

Center], coarse gravel, 10 feet; fine white sand, 15 feet,

The most extensive of these plains occur * * * in resting on till or ledge.

Newington and the northwest part of Portsmouth. Broad- Several other wells in this neighborhood, 30 to 40 feet in

ly rounded deposits of the same class occur frequently in depth, encountered nothing but stratified gravel, sand, or

this district, and southward, along the seacoast, they form clay.

the elevations on which the villages of Rye, North Hamp- Breakfast Hill, about 150 feet above the sea, and the

ton, and Hampton are built. A very interesting ridge of plain about 50 feet lower, which extends southward to the

this kind extends from northwest to southeast through first railroad crossing in North Hampton, are composed of

Newburyport. * * *

coarse gravel and sand. Thence similar deposits, 100 to

The last of these kamelike deposits which remains to be 125 feet above the sea, extend in nearly level plains south-

described within the limits of Piscataqua basin is the ex=- west to North Hampton village, forming the watershed

tensive plain of Newington and the northwest part of between Winnicut River and the ocean. They are

Portsmouth. This is 3 miles long from north to south, and bounded in many places by escarpments which descend

for most of this distance averages a mile in width, forming steeply 25 to 50 feet, and a hollow, about an acre in extent

a plateau 60 to 100 feet above Great Bay and Piscataqua and 50 feet deep, is half filled by Knowles Pond. This

River on each side. Outcropping ledges and scattered formation continues southward with nearly the same

boulders are seen in many places upon its surface, but height to Hampton village, where it terminates, falling

numerous wells show only modified drift to depths of 30 in gentle slopes toward the sea.

or 40 feet, being first coarse gravel, 3 to 10 feet in thickness, Nine miles farther south part of the city of Newburyport

succeeded below by interstratified fine gravel and sand. is built on a broadly rounded ridge of gravel and sand,

The entire western edge of this deposit is a gently sloping which, like the foregoing deposits, probably had a similar

escarpment, which descends 10 to 30 feet. On the north origin with the narrow and steep ridges of the kames, hav-

and east it rests mainly on ledges but at one place falls ing been bounded by portions of the melting ice sheet.

in an abrupt slope more than 50 feet. A section at its The series of kames noticed by Rev. Mr. Wright in New-

base in the north part of Newington showed sand overlain ton and Amesbury may be continuous southeast to the

by gray clay, as at Dover. Southward, near the Concord Newburyport ridge. So far as traced, this deposit appears

& Portsmouth Railroad, its surface is sand, obliquely strati- first in the south part of Amesbury. It has been cut

fied. Between this and the Eastern Railroad it is changed through by Merrimack River and on its opposite side rises'

to a broad ridge, 25 to 30 feet high, composed mostly of to a height of about 150 feet in Moultons Hill. A quarter

pebbles 6 inches to a foot in diameter, packed as com- of a mile farther to the southeast it is depressed to 75 feet

pactly as possible, with no layers of sand. This gravel and shows the sharp ridges and knolls of typical kames.

is finely exposed in an excavation, from which it is teamed From this point it extends, with a nearly uniform height

2 miles for repairing streets in Portsmouth. The deposit of about 100 feet, along High Street to the middle of the

24 SHORTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

city and thence continues on the southwest side of this South of Oak Hill Cemetery there is a "kettle hole."

street to the Upper Green. Here it is interrupted for a * * * It is a typical small ice-block hole with south-

little distance, beyond which it lies on the northeast side of eastern outwash sand and gravel kames, probably depos-

this street, extending to within a half mile of Old Town ited in cracks or gorges in the glacial ice which filled the

Hill. It is thus at least 6 miles long. No other high whole valley of Little River.

deposits of modified drift are found in this vicinity, and High Street, in Newbury, is built on sand and grave1 that

wide areas of lowland lie on both sides. Excavations in cap clay and till, a typical beach barrier sloping ba~k to

the northwest part of the city show the ridge there to be the lagoon at Four Rock Creek. The debris is washed

composed mainly of waterworn gravel, with the largest away from the outcropping ledges that rise above the

pebbles about a foot in diameter. A railroad cut, known boulder till covering the surface. This beach barrier with

as Marchs Hill, 2 miles farther southeast, has only occa- the lagoon on the shore side occupied the whole cf the

sional layers of gravel, with the largest pebbles 6 inches in Little River valley and was continuous on the southwest

diameter, very irregularly stratified with sand, which is around Old Town and Little Old Town hills. A gorge here four-fifths of the whole deposit. The depth of between these hills, now filled with coarse waterworn

modified drift forming the ridge is shown by wells to be gravels on'top of boulder till, was the drainage outlet to the

from 50 to 90 feet.

southeast. In front of the gravels the outwash sands

OBSERVATIONS BY SEARS.

spread out over Newbury Old Town, to the mouth of Parker River, where steep banks and fringing lobes er.tend

Sears noted the ridge in Newbury and New- into the salt marsh overlapping the boulder till.

buryport and some sections in it that are not OTHER ICE-FRONT DEPOSITS OF THE REGION.

now exposed. He regarded it as partly

moraine and partly barrier beach. The fol- In this region there are a few other ice-f^ont

lowing quotation 1 shows that his interpreta- or morainic deposits which do not seem to be

tion of the position of the ice front with respect related to the Newington moraine and yet are

to the moraine differs from that of the present of interest in connection with the subject of

authors:

this paper by reason of their bearing on the

interpretation of the glacial history of the

TheMerrimack River was probably a halting place of the glacial ice in its retreat northward, for its southern shore, from the mouth of the Parker River to Pipestave Hill,

region. The most moraine which lies

distant of across the

these south

is the end of

marks typical ice contacts of morainal till and overwash Lower Bay, Sebago Lake, Maine, 18 miles north

gravels capped by sand and silt. High Street, in New- of the Saco segment. This is a gravel rfdge

bury and Newburyport, is laid out upon the top of the trending southwest to west-southwest, r^ing

terrace formed by this ice contact, a section of which shows it to be composed of boulder till and clay beds resting upon the glacial bedrock * * * in varying depths.

steeply 50 to 60 feet from the lake level, and presenting a very gentle southward slope of

At Grasshopper Plain it is at least 50 feet in thickness and gravel and sand in which there are several

is covered by 20 feet of coarse gravel with 25 feet of fine deep pits occupied by ponds. At the lake the

sand at the surface. * * * A section of this terrace outwash slope has an altitude of 300 feet above

across High Street extending from the river through Green Street to the frog pond by "the Mall" gives boulder till on High Street at an elevation of 80 feet above tidewater.

the sea gravel.

and is composed of coarse sand and About 11 miles southwest, at an

The frog pond is the site of a small detached iceberg that altitude of 200 feet, the outwash is very fine

was buried in the morainal till. South of "the Mall" the sand which grades imperceptibly into marine

overwash and outwash gravels have formed a series of cones clay.

and short ridges or kames of sand and gravel extending southeasterly into Newbury. The tracks of the Boston &

The moraine at Bauneg Beg Pond, 3| miles

Maine Railroad cut through these gravels on the west, and north of North Berwick village (PL IV, p. 12),

the track of the City Freight Railroad cuts through them in the towns of North Berwick and Sanford,

on the east. In 1898 this cut exhibited a good section of Maine, is several miles west of Merriland Ridge.

the deposits some 300 yards in length. The gravels and It surrounds the south end of Bauneg Beg

sands dipped to the south at an angle of 35° and were capped by a deposit of clay having sand partings every few inches. The greatest depth of the gravel and sand was 40

Pond as a hummocky, "knob and kettle" surface which grades eastward and southward

feet. North of the center of the hill there was a dip 20 feet into the broad sand plain that overlies marine

deep filled with clay having fine sand partings, and under clay in Wells and North Berwick.

the clay, at the bottom of the dip, there was a mass of peat, The moraines at Bauneg Beg Pond and Sebago

probably the site of an iceberg in the gravel before the clay was deposited.

Lake lie several miles back from the Newirgton moraine, at the western edge of the coastal

i Sears, J. H., The physical geography, geology, mineralogy, and lowland. Besides these moraines and their

paleontology of Essex County, Mass., pp. 296, 301, and fig. 169, p. 352, Salem, Essex Institute, 1905.

outwash

deposits,

there

are

extensive

sand

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

PROFESSIONAL PAPER 108 PLATE XII

A. GRA.VEL PIT ON MIDDLE ROAD, PORTSMOUTH, N. H. Shows stratified gravel, sands, and clay in the inner side of the moraine, containing here
and there larger but little-rounded cobbles.
X.*.- *V % W^ R GRAVELS AND SAND, PERHAPS OF KAME ORIGIN, IN SUNSET HILL, ELIOT,
MAINE. Poorly sorted, unevenly stratified gravel.

NEWINGTON MORAINE, MAINE,, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

25

plains that front the highlands and valley flat-topped ridges about 100 feet in elevation,

trains in the valleys that debouch from the composed of sand and small gravel which is in

highlands upon the coastal lowlands, as, for part water-rounded, sorted, and stratified.

example, in the valleys of Salmon Falls, These ridges rise only a few feet above the sur-

Mousam, Little Ossipee, and Saco rivers, rounding plains of marine clay and sand except

which seem to indicate other moraines or at where rock ledges having the same northeast

least ice-front positions correlative with the trend protrude through the gravels. These

moraine at Sebago Lake. The outwash from ridges are 4 miles northeast of the Newington

these later ice halts is larger in amount and moraine at Saco River and are separated from it

more broadly and deeply SJtfead over the by a lowland consisting chiefly of clay. They

region. In places the later outwash covers the may be an extension or an equivalent of the

Newington deposits and extends beyond them Newington moraine, but the observed facts

to the present shore line.

indicate rather that these ridges are to be

In Eliot and Kittery, Maine, there are a num- classed with other northeastward-elongated o
ber of hills (indicated by moraine symbol hills in the Portland quadrangle, such as part

on PI. IV), wholly or in part composed of of Oak Hill, Pleasant Hill, and Sandy Hill,

stratified drift, which lie a short distance east which are drift-covered ledges having super-

(outside) of the Newington moraine. The posed mantles of stratified gravels formed by

stratified gravels and sands of these hills are the reworking of their till and other drift by

seemingly kame or other ice-front deposits the sea, which at the same time deposited clay

which show no relation to one another nor to in the low places around them. There are no

the Newington moraine. They do not appear other drift deposits farther northeast in the

to mark any definite or continued stand of the Portland quadrangle that can be regarded as

ice front. The following have been noted, morainal. If there were such a northeastward

and there are doubtless others in the region. extension of the moraine it may have been

In Kittery there is a broad, flat-topped ridge destroyed after the Newington substage by

of gravels and sand in which the Boston & strong streams that discharged from the Sebago

Maine Railroad Co.'s gravel pit exposes a Lake or younger ice fronts through the territory

thickness of about 40 feet of well-sorted and now largely covered by marine clays in Saco, stratified materials. An area of stratified Scarboro, South Portland, and Portland. It

sands and gravels lies immediately east of Bolt is more likely that any moraine deposited in

Hill, a drumlin, in Eliot. At Greenacre, in this region, where the pre-Newington bedrock

Eliot, and including Frankfort Island, in and till surface is generally low (being now in

Piscataqua River, is a narrow patch three- large part below or only slightly above sea level),

quarters of a mile long of low, hummocky would have been buried by the later marine

knolls which are distinctly kamelike and are deposits. Morainal material has not been ob-

composed of waterworn gravel and sand. served where it might be expected on rock sur-

Sunset Hill, in Eliot, is probably composed faces that protrude above the level of the marine

largely of till but contains in its northern part clay and are in the line of general trend of the

thick deposits of stratified sands and gravel, Newington moraine. It may be inferred, there-

perhaps of kame origin (PI. XII, B).

fore, that the Newington ice front departed from

These scattered kamelike or moraine-like this trend either seaward by the advance of a lobe

deposits east of the moraine indicate no prolonged halt in the retreat of the ice before the

througoh the Saco and Scarboro lowland or else northward. Southeastward lobation is not at-

front reached the Newington position.

tested by any known deposits of morainic mate-

NORTHWARD EXTENSION OF THE NEWINGTON MORAINE.

rials. To the north, on the other hand, in the northwest corner of the Portland and the north-

east corner of the Buxton quadrangles, in Gor-

In the town of Saco (see PL IV and the map ham and Buxton, there are gravel ridges and a

of the Portland quadrangle), from Goosefare kamelike gravel hill (PL IV) which may well

Brook to Stuart Brook, for If miles along the be parts of the moraine. They are about 2 to 8

Boston-Portland post road, is a line of smooth, miles south of the moraine at Sebago Lake and

26 SHORTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

approximately on the line between that mo- Some of the clay lying outside of the moraine

raine and the Saco segment of the Newington is contemporaneous with and stratig^aphi^ally

moraine, which is 12 miles farther south. On equivalent to the moraine. This relation is

this line also is the rock ridge north of the Saco best shown at Merriland Ridge, where, ir the

segment, which may be a link between moraine railroad cut (PI. VII and fig. 1), a bed of clay

segments like the rock hills between the Bidde- identical with that in the broad plains of ma-

ford and Kennebunkport segments. The con- rine deposits is intercalated in the sand and

ditions thus afford a weak suggestion of con- gravel beds of the moraine and outwash. At

nection between the Newington moraine and that locality also the entire outwash plain

the moraine at Sebago Lake. The latter, how- slopes down to and grades into a low, swampy

ever, may belong wholly or in part to a later sand and clay plain about the headwaters of

substage, for its gravel and sand outwash in Webhannet River. It is clear that this clay

the main is continuous with and in part over- bed records a period of quiet discharge of

lies the clay and sand plains, which can be glacial waters during which they carried to

traced without interruption or break in their and deposited on the moraine only the f nest

nearly plane surface to and over the moraine of glacial detritus rock flour and mud. At

in Saco.

other periods such materials were born<> or

SOUTHWARD EXTENSION OP THE NEWINGTON MORAINE.

drifted seaward and deposited in deeper or less disturbed waters than those at the ice front,

and there formed the plains of which the flat

The Newington moraine was not traced in the valley of Webhannet River is one. This

southward and southwestward beyond New- particular plain probably received no appre-

bury. Very probably correlative deposits will ciable contributions of outwash during stages

be found when that region is studied.

later than the Newington substage, because it

RELATION OP THE MORAINE TO OTHER is some distance away and cut off by rocky

PLEISTOCENE FORMATIONS.

uplands from the Kennebunk and Mousam

ROCHES MOTJTONNEES AND TILL.

valleys on the north and the Great Works and

All the moraine segments noted lie in part on roche moutonnee surfaces and by inference also on ground moraine, or till. They have not been found to overlie stratified drift or such marine sediments as abound in the region. Glacially sculptured ledges lie both inside and outside of the moraine in fact, all the ledges in the region have been glaciated. Till also is found on both sides of the moraine, and there
are no perceptible differences between any of the exposures of till seen in the region. No till has been found in or on the typically developed moraines.

Salmon Falls valleys on the southwest. It was from points farther up these valleys that the outwash of later stages came. On that account the marine clay deposits in the lower parts of these valleys are more extensive and at higher altitudes than in the coastal territory between the drainage basins of these streams. In ether places the earlier clay deposits and some of the sandy outwash of the Newington substage are covered by more or less clay discharged into the sea from more northerly and later stands of the ice, during the time when clay was accumulating behind and upon the inner slope of the moraine. In Saco and Biddeford, along Saco

MARINE SEDIMENTS. 1

River, excavations for gravel and sand ehow

Marine clay and associated sand beds, in that the clay overlies the northwest side of the the "main horizontally stratified and in a few moraine and in places covers the crest. In places fossiliferous, form extensive plains of most places where the marine clay borderr the sedimentation throughout the region, both inner side of the moraine the surfaces of the east (outside), and also north and west (inside) two formations meet at an angle, and there is of the moraine. In a few places the clay is no significant mingling of their materials, as sandy or contains sandy lenses and beds, and there is on the opposite side. Wells along: the over a large part of this region, particularly at western base of the moraine in Portsmouth the north and west, the top beds are clean sand. show that the clay does not pass under the
moraine but lies against it. The inference to

1 These formations, the so-called "Leda clay" and overlying sands, as be drawn from this fact is that all the deposits

developed in southwestern Maine and southeastern New Hampshire, are

the subject of another paper, to be published later.

of marine clay and sand lying inside the New-

NEWINGTON MORAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

27

ington moraine are younger than that moraine. as high as the moraine. Therefore, unless it is Furthermore, these deposits are traceable in- postulated that an ice block, of which there is land into the broad sand plains and valley no evidence, or some high land not now retrains shown on the map (PL IV), which are maining separated the moraine area from the

evidently glacial outwash from ice that stood ocean, there could have been no body of

some miles back of the Newington moraine. standing water not part of the sea at the re-

However, all the clay in this region, from the quired place and altitude to determine the

lowest and oldest bed to the highest and form of the moraine.

youngest, must, for the following reasons, be 3. In Merriland Ridge the interlamination

regarded as a stratigraphic unit that was de- of clay with moraine and outwash material,

posited uninterruptedly during a period per- and the continuity there indicated of the sand

haps beginning before the Newington substage and gravel beds in the moraine with marine

but certainly continuing through and after it. clay beds in the plains to the east show that

First, the clay can be traced as a continuous the debris from the glacier was discharged

deposit from points well inside of the moraine directly into the ocean.

through such breaks as are made by Saco, 4. Although the wide, level plains of marine

Kennebunk, and Salmon Falls rivers in the clay were deposited in situations open to the

moraine ridge to areas outside of the moraine. disturbing influence of river, tidal, and storm

Second, careful scrutiny of the surface forms of currents, the clay is characteristically uniform

the clay deposit,* of sections in the clay, and of in composition and texture and in the attitude

the physical character of the clay itself fail to of its bedding. Therefore the clay must have

reveal any basis for subdivision of the clay been deposited in quiet water namely, in this

into younger and older deposits.

instance, water whose surface was considerably

above the levels up to which the clay plains

EVIDENCE THAT THE MORAINE WAS LAID DOWN were built and in consequence probably deep

IN THE SEA.

enough to submerge the moraine.

The foregoing observations on the relation POSITION OF THE MORAINE WITH RESPECT TO

of the Newington moraine to marine sedi-

DIRECTION OF ICE MOVEMENT.

ments indicate that the ice front stood in the The general direction of ice movement in

sea at the time and place of deposition of this this region was south-southeastward, as is indi-

moraine. This conclusion is established by cated by numerous striae and also by a few

the following evidence:

drumlins. In the neighborhood of Biddeford,

1. The surface of the moraine, as shown Maine, the striae trend S. 10°-15° E., and

above, is in most places fairly smooth or is from Biddeford southwestward the easting in-

hummocky only in a small way by reason of creases with seeming regularity to S. 40° ± 5° E.

knolls that are low and have gentle slopes, in in the neighborhood of Portsmouth, although

contrast to the characteristically knobby kame there are local exceptions. The ice flow was

forms, and in large part the crest of the moraine in accord with the general southeasterly land

is broad and flat. Furthermore, although the slope and approximately parallel to the trend

material of the moraine is predominantly of the major drainage lines. The moraine seg-

rounded, water-transported, and accumulated ments in Biddeford, Kennebunkport, Wells,

by glaciofluvial discharge, the form is not South Berwick, Rye, the Hamptons, Seabrook,

that of moraines accumulated subaerially but and Salisbury are then approximately athwart

is like that of a delta or a line of many laterally the general course of ice movement, and such

confluent deltas, as for example in Biddeford, departures of the moraines from that trend as

Wells, Newington, North Hampton, and Sea- are indicated by the map are accounted for by

brook.

the influence of the local topography of the

2. These very nearly level and broad, flat rock floor.

delta-like tops are all near the sea and are not On the other hand, the Dover Neck, New-

separated from it by any present obstructions ington and Portsmouth, and Newburyport seg-

1 The writer's observations offer no support for subdivision of the clay ments are in part oblique to and in part even

on the basis of "distinct topographic types," as postulated by F. G. nearly parallel to the general direction of ice

Clapp (Complexity of the glacial period in northeastern New England: Geol. Soc. America Bull., vol. 18, pp. 505-566,1907).

movement.

The explanation of this seeming

28 SHORTER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GENERAL GEOLOGY, 1917.

discordance is found in the fact that the the ice front during the accumulation of the

moraine is predominantly the product of ac- moraine.

cumulation of the load of effluent glacial waters and is not pushed material. It might

DISCONTINUITY OF THE MORAINE.

therefore lie at any site on the margin of the The major intervals between the segments

ice which permitted the discharge of glacial of the Newington moraine which require expla-

streams, regardless of the normal form of the nation are of two lands. Those in Biddeford

front with respect to the direction of ice advance. and Eennebunkport and in Wells and South

The factor that ^n all probability chiefly deter- Berwick are occupied by rock hills of greater

mined the form of the ice edge in the vicinities height than the moraine. These rock hills are,

of Portsmouth and Newburyport was the de- in fact, links rather than gaps between the

struction of the glacier by calving of bergs and moraine segments. They obstructed the ad-

melting in the deep waters of the Piscataqua vance of the ice and were the anchors that held

and Merrimack estuaries. Thus reentrants the ice and in a measure determined the josi-

were made in the ice front. Probably also tion of the Newington halt. No effort was

subglacial drainage in large volumes was dis- made to find on these hills niorainal deposits

charged at these low points and assisted in marking the position of the ice front; perhaps

cutting back the front.

careful search will disclose them. However,

RECESSIONAL NATURE OF THE MORAINE. the absence of push material and the preponderance of stream-borne materials along1 other

A large number of exposures of drift deposits parts of the ice border lead to the inference that

have been observed in the course of five sea- little niorainic drift was piled up against or on

sons' field work on the general geology of these hills, for they could not have been the

southwestern Maine and the adjacent part of sites of glaciofluvial discharge. Such materials

New Hampshire, particularly in the regions as were dropped here from the melting ice v^ere

of Portland, Maine, and Portsmouth, N. H., perhaps too small in amount to make a notice-

which have been closely examined. In none able accumulation and would otherwise be

of these exposures is there any evidence of indistinguishable from ground moraine.

more than one ice advance over that region. On the other hand, the Kennebunk, Mous^m,

There is no superposition of later till on earlier and Salmon Falls valleys make real breaks in

till; there are no differences in the degree of the continuity of the moraine so wide (7 and weathering or extent of erosion of till which 8 miles) as to demand special consideration.

could safely be ascribed to any other cause A brief search in these valleys for morainal

than accident of situation or exposure; and deposits or for evidence of either absence or

there are no "interglacial" deposits. There obliteration of the moraine was without con-

is, therefore, no basis for assuming that the clusive result. On account of the deep filling

Newington moraine marks the termination of by later marine sediments there seems tc be

an epochal advance or readvance of the ice, little chance of establishing either the presence

nor even of a very short readvance. It can or the absence of the moraine across these

only be concluded that this is a recessional valleys, but the manner in which the clay and

moraine that marks a stand of the ice front sand plains surround exposed ends of moraine

conditioned by a balance between the rates of segments suggests strongly that the continu-

ice movement and of ablation. In accord with ations of the segments lie buried under clay

this conclusion is the evident lack of angular in the deeper parts of these valleys, just as

till and of materials heaped up by glacial shove, the Biddeford and Saco segments are partly

a fact which suggests that the ice was not mov- buried in the Saco Valley.

ing vigorously. The regular stratification of the washed material also indicates that the ice

AGE OF THE MORAINE.

front made no advance during the deposition The age of the Newington moraine can not

of the moraine. On the contrary, the great be decisively stated until the general problems

width of parts of the moraine and the thickness of Pleistocene correlation in northern New Eng-

of the "backset" beds indicate slow retreat of land have been settled. It is established that

NEWINGTON MOEAINE, MAINE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND MASSACHUSETTS.

29

the Newington moraine is the youngest strictly Island, Marthas Vineyard, Nantucket, and the

glacial deposit in the immediate vicinity of the Cape Cod Peninsula 2 there must have been ice

coast of New Hampshire and southwestern over the coastal counties of New Hampshire

Maine. The only younger deposits are the later and southwestern Maine. Therefore, it must

beds of marine clay ("Leda") and sand which be concluded that the Newington moraine is of

overlie parts of the Newington moraine, and, as Wisconsin age, probably late Wisconsin, and,

has been indicated, these are sea-laid outwash as a corollary, that so also is the marine

materials of a somewhat later stage during ("Leda") clay of that region.

which the ice front stood not far back from the

Newington moraine. Clapp's statement 1 that

there is a till formation younger than and over-

SUMMARY.

lying marine ("Leda") clays finds no support

in

any

exposed

sections

of

the

clay

and

its

A recessional moraine consisting of several separate segments disposed along a sinuous course lies near the At-

associated deposits which the authors have lantic coast and has been traced through 60 miles from

been able to find. But it is not merely for Saco, Maine, to Newbury, Mass. It is for the most part

that reason that Clapp's conclusion is held to about or less than 100 feet above sea level but rises to 180

be inapplicable to the coastal region here con- feet in Biddeford, Maine, 150 feet in Dover, N. H.,and

sidered.

The

critical fact

is

that

the

surface

Newburyport, Mass., and is between 200 and 250 feet above the sea in Wells and South Berwick, Maine. Although not

of the clay deposit is not glaciated but is a plain more than 40 to 100 feet higher than surrounding Pleisto-

of deposition which, except for slight or mod- cene formations, nevertheless it is topographically promi-

erate trenching by stream erosion, has been en- nent because it is in a region o.f slight relief. The moraine

tirely unaltered since its formation. It is not rests upon and is surrounded by a floor of ice-smoothed

denied that Pleistocene marine clays older than

rock and of till. The region was submerged during the building of the moraine, and the ice front stood in the sea.

the Newington substage may have been cov- The moraine is the result of the accumulation of glacio-

ered by till, but if such clays are present in fluvial detritus discharged directly into the sea; conse-

this region they are not to be seen because they quently in some places it is built up as broad, flat, delta-

are buried. It is also granted that elsewhere like plains of sand and gravel. Clay ("Leda clay") was

marine

clays

equivalent

to

the

Newington

or

continuously deposited in the sea, both while the moraine was accumulating and after the ice retreated from the mo-

later substages may have been glaciated but raine, so that the younger clay beds in some places overlie

not that such relations have yet been estab- the moraine. This clay is the fine glacial outwash. The

lished.

moraine and the marine clay probably belong to a late

It seems reasonable and safe to assume that Wisconsin substage of the Pleistocene epoch.

when ice of the Wisconsin stage occupied Long 2 T he correlations of moraines in these regions with the early Wisconsin

moraine of New Jersey is accepted. See Fuller, M. L., The geology of

1 Clapp, F. G., Complexity of the glacial period in northeastern New- Long Island, N. Y.: U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 82, table opposite

England: Geol. Soc. America Bull., vol. 18, pp. 505-556,1907.

p. 220,1914.

o

