ner sou

fh

an e Wider s Sud Area,

a P z and Mohav C:oun 1es,_ Arizon

ARIZONA

Xns«:rucltlim»s on oirdlering pu.n1Micaltlions of \the U.S. Geologic~ Swvey, aJo!!]g with prices of abe w~ offerings, aire give!!] in the curIrent-yeaJr D.ssu.nes of !the monililly cattallog "New lPUblncaltliom ofttlhe U.S. Geological! Swrvey." Prices of available U.S. Geological Survey pu.nlbHcaltliom Ire!~ prioir U) ilie CW'Jrelll~ yeaJr are lisRed illll tthe mos~ Irecent annooll "Price and! Availability LD.st" Publications that aire Hsredl fum variou.ns U.S. GoollogJicsll Swrvey camllogs (~~~ lbl~telk fum§n~~ te<lllv~rr) lbu~ no~ lis~ed fum tthe mos~ Irecen~ mmual"Price and AvmlablillRey Lis~" Me llllO llongeir avrulalble.
Prices ofireporritS ~rell~ ~o ilie open fiRes are given inlthe l!Jisting "U.S. Geologica! Smvey Open-File Reports," updated momhly, wlhlich is for sW!e fum mic~rofiche from \the U.S. Geological Survey, Boob and Open-FHe Reports Section, Fedleml Centeli, Bmt 25425, Denveir, CO 00225. Reports lielleasedllthrollllgh ilie NTIS may be ob~edl by writing ~o !the Nationai Technical Information Sell'Vlice, U.S. Depm11men~ ofCommell'Ce, Sprill1lgfieldl, VA 22161; ple&se indudle NTIS ~report number whh inquiry.
Ordler U.S. Geological Swrvey pu.nlbllications lbly Ill1ll8lllll or <lllV~Ir ~llll~ te<llliiDIID~~IT' from the offices given below.

®©XQ)~@

lPYofessionSlllPa~YS, Bulletins, Water-Supply lPa~s. Techniques of Water-Resources Investigations, Circulms, publications of generml interest (such &S le&flets, p&mphlets, ooohlets). single copies oflEmrthquakes lk Volcanoes, lPYeliminmy Determination of lEpicentern, end some miscellaneous reports, including some of the foregoing series that have gone out of print at the Superintendent of Documents, are obtainable by mail from

UJ.§. G~oll~H<e&ll §un!l"'o/~Y~ lBloo~ &Iln«ll O~IlllalFHll~ ~!I!JlllO!lU

JF~(QJ~IrBlll C~!lllft~Irp lBlo~ ~§~~

coIDl~llll'o/~Irp

~®~~§

Subscriptions to ~odicmls (lEmthquskes & Volcanoes ~md Preliminary Determination of Epicenters) can be obtmned ONLY from the

oq§unJP>~Irllllllft~!lll(Q]~lJllft IDl~unlllnl.<ellll~
Go'o/~Irllllllil!l~llllft JP>~rllllllftllllll~ O!Ml~
W~lhlllllll~!Jllp IDl.C. ~00®~

(Check or money order must be payable to Superintendent of Documents.)

Books of the U.S. Geological Survey are available over the counter at the following Geological Survey Public Inquiries Offices. all of which are authorized agents of the Superintendent of Documents:
o WA§lH!liNG'II'ONP IDl.C.--Main Interior Bldg., 2600 corridor, 18th and C Sts., NW.
o IDllENVIE~p Colloll"&irllo--Federal Bldg.• Rm. 169, 1961 Stout St. o ll..O§ ANGI&ll..IE§; C&llrui'o!l"IlllDBl--lFederalBldg.• Rm. 7638, 300 N.
Los Angeles St. o MlENll..O JP>A~OCP C&llrui'Oll"IlllftBl--Bldg. 3 (Stop 533), Rm. 3128,
345 Middlefield lRd.
o ~IE§TON~ 'VDir8D.unHB1--503 National Center, Rm. 1C402, 12201 Sunrise Valley Dr.
o §All..'II' ll..AOCIE CII'II'Y~ UJttB!lhl--lFederal Bldg., Rm. 8105, 125 South Stme St.
o §AN RANCII§COP C&lln.fi'o!l"IlllDBl--Customhouse. Rm. 504, 555 Battery St.
o §JP>OOCANIEP Wtll§lhlnllll8ftollll--U.S. Courthouse. Rm. 678, West 920 Riverside Ave..
o ANCIHIO~AGIE, AllB!§~&--Rm. 101, 4230 University Dr. o ANCIHIO~AGlEp All8l§~Bl--Federal Bldg, Rm.JE-146. 701 C St.

For maps, address mail orders to
UJ.§. G~oll~<e&ll §unn~yp M&Jlll IDlfimtrlll»unftRollll
JF~(QJ~!l"&ll C<e!lllft~IrP lBlo~ ~~
IDl~IlllV~Irp CO ~@~~
Residents of Alsska may order maps from
All&§!%& IDl~ftlr'fill»unftfiollll §~101ollll~ '(LJ.§. G~o~H«:&Il §unneyp
N~w IF~~nll lBlunftll(Q]D.un~ D Jffio~ 11~
1l®ll'Il'w~lll7ftlhl A'o/<e.p !F&Drll»&llll~ ATI{ m®ll

Maps may be purchased over the counter at the U.S. Geological Survey offices where oooks are sold (all addresses in above list) and at the following Geological Survey offices:
o ~Oll..ll..A~ Mfi£wunll"fi--1400 Independence Rd. o IDllEN'VIE~, Colloll"&irllo--Map Distribution. Bldg. 810, Federal
Center o IFAJI~lBlANOC§~ All8l§~Bl--New Federal Bldg.• 101 Twelfth Ave.

Chapter C
Mineral Resources of the
Swansea Wilderness Study Area,
La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona
By RICHARD M. TOSDAL, ROBERT G. EPPINGER, H. RICHARD BLANK, JR., DANIEL H. KNEPPER, JR.,
ANDREA J. GALLAGHER, JAMES A. PITKIN, and
STEPHANIE L. JONES
U.S. Geological Survey
GEORGE S. RYAN
U.S. Bureau of Mines
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1704 MINERAL RESOURCES OF WILDERNESS STUDY AREAS: HAVASU REGION, ARIZONA

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR MANUEL LUJAN, jR., Secretary
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY Dallas L. Peck, Director

Any use of trade, product, or firm names ·in this publication is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, WASHINGTON : 1990
For sale by the Books and Open-File Reports Section U.S. Geological Survey Federal Center, Box 25425 Denver, CO 80225

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Mineral resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and

Mohave counties, Arizona I by Richard Tosdal...[et al.].

p. cm.-(U.S. Geological Survey bulletin ; 1704--C)

Includes bibliographical references (p. ).

Supt. of Docs. no.: I 19.3:1704--C

1. Mines and mineral resources-Arizona-Swansea Wilderness.

2. Swansea Wilderness (Ariz.) I. Tosdal, Richard M. II. Series.

QW75.B9 no. 1704--C

557.3 s--dc20

90--13858

[TN24.A6]

[553 '.09791 72]

CIP

•
STUDIES RELATED TO WILDERNESS
Bureau of Land Management Wilderness Study Areas
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act (Public Law 94-579, October 21, 1976) requires the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Bureau of Mines to conduct mineral surveys on certain areas to determine the mineral values, if any, that may be present. Results must be made available to the public and be submitted to the President and the Congress. This report presents the results of a mineral survey of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area (AZ--050--015A), La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

CONTENTS
Summary C1 Abstract C1 Character and setting C1 Identified resources C2 Mineral resource potential C3
Introduction C3 Location and physiography C3 Previous work C3 Methods of study C4 Acknowledgments C4
Appraisal of identified resources and known mineralized areas C4 Methods of investigations C4 Mining history C4 Oil and gas CS Appraisal of sites examined CS Conclusions C6
Assessment of mineral resource potential C6 Geology C6 Geochemistry C7 Introduction C7 Methods C7 Results C7 Interpretation C8 Geophysical studies C9 Aeromagnetics and gravity C9 Remote sensing C14 Radioelement distribution C1S Mineral resource assessment C16 Base and precious metals C16 Manganese C16 Uranium and vanadium C16 Oil and gas C17 Sand and gravel C17
References cited C17 Appendixes C21
Definition of levels of mineral resource potential and certainty of assessment C22 .
Resource/reserve classification C23 Geologic time chart C24
FIGURES
I. Index map showing location of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties Arizona C2
2. Map showing mineral resource potential and generalized geology of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona C10
3. Geochemical anomalies from stream-sediment, heavy-mineral concentrate, and rock samples from the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona C12
4. Aeromagnetic anomaly map of the Swansea Wilderness.Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona C14
5. Bouguer gravity anomaly map of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona C1S
Contents V

TABLE
1. Summary statistics for elements found in anomalous concentrations in streamsediment and heavy-mineral concentrate samples in the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, Arizona C13
VI Contents

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

By Richard M. Tosdal, Robert G. Eppinger, H. Richard Blank, Jr., Daniel H. Knepper, Jr., Andrea j. Gallagher, james A. Pitkin, and Stephanie L. Jones
U.S. Geological Survey

George S. Ryan U.S. Bureau of Mines

SUMMARY
Abstract
The Swansea Wilderness Study area (AZ-05~01 SA) lies in the Rawhide and Buckskin Mountains, west-central Arizona, about 20 mi east of Parker, Ariz. At the request of the U.S. Bureau of land Management, mineral surveys of approximately 15,755 acres were done by the U.S. Geological Survey and U.S. Bureau of Mines to assess its mineral resources (known) and mineral resource potential (undiscovered). In this report, the study area refers to only that part of the wilderness study area for which a mineral survey was requested by the U.S. Bureau of land Management.
Mining and prospecting activity has o·ccurred in or adjacent to the Swansea Wilderness Study Area in the Swansea, Mesa, and Owens mineral districts. Copper, silver, and lesser quantities of gold, lead, zinc, and manganese have been produced from mines in these districts. Metals have been recovered from deposits along the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault and subsidiary high- and low-angle normal faults (Swansea and Mesa mineral districts) and along northwest-striking highangle faults that cut mylonitic gneiss and schist (Owens mineral district). There are no identified resources in the study area.
Moderate and high potential for base and precious metals (copper, lead, zinc, gold, silver) in the study area exists in areas along northwest-striking high-angle faults in the northern part of the study area, along high- and low-angle faults in the lower-plate terrane south of the Bill Williams River, and along the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault and its upperplate faults on the south, northeast, and northwest margins of the area; low potential exists in the south-central area. Part of Black Mesa in the northern part of the study area has high potential for manganese, whereas an area in the southeast

corner of the study area has low potential for manganese. Areas of low potential for uranium and vanadium are found in the Tertiary sedimentary and volcanic rocks in the northern and southeastern parts of the study area. The entire Swansea Wilderness Study Area has no resource potentia I for oil and gas and sand and gravel.
Character and Setting
The Swansea Wilderness Study area (AZ--Q50--015A) covers approximately 15,755 acres in La Paz1 and Mohave Counties, west-central Arizona~ about 20 mi east of Parker, Ariz. (fig. 1). The study area straddles the Bill Williams River, which divides the Rawhide Mountains on the north from the Buckskin Mountains on the south. Elevations in the study area range from about 600ft along the Bill Williams River to 1,600 to 1,700 ft at the highest point on Black Mesa, north of the river, and at the crest of the Buckskin Mountains south of the river.
The study area lies in the northwest-trending belt of metamorphic core complexes in west-central Arizona (Rehrig and Reynolds, 1980). In these complexes, mid-crustal and deeper rocks were tectonically transported to the surface along shallow-dipping nonnal faults or detachment faults during a period of extensional tectonism in the late Oligocene and Miocene (Davis and others, 1980; Spencer and Reynolds, 1986; Davis, 1988) (see appendixes for geologic time chart). The detachment fault in the study area is the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment of Spencer and Reynolds (1986, 1989), which crosses the northern part of the study area and crops out discontinuously along the south border of the study area (fig. 2). The detachment fault divides the

Manuscript approved for publication, August 20, 1990.

1 La Paz County was created by the Arizona Legislature effective January 1, 1983, from what was the northern half of Yuma County.

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

C1

bedrock geology of the area into two parts, an extended and highly faulted upper plate of Proterozoic, Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Tertiary metamorphic, igneous, and sedimentary rocks, and a lower plate of Tertiary mylonite and mylonitic gneiss that was derived from Proterozoic, Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Tertiary metamorphic, igneous, and sedimentary protoliths. Mylonitic deformation in the lower plate is considered to be a deeper level expression of, and slightly older than, brittle extensional faulting along the detachment fault and its upper plate (Davis, 1983; Spencer and Reynolds, 1986; Howard and John, 1987; Davis and Lister, 1988). Sedimentary and volcanic rock deposition accompanied extension, and these rocks now crop out in the highly faulted upper plate terrane (Davis and others, 1980; Spencer and Reynolds, 1989). During the last stages of, or after the end of, the extensional deformation, high-angle faults cut the detachment terrane. Extensional deformation was followed by basaltic and locally silicic volcanism in the middle and late Miocene (Suneson and Lucchitta, 1983). These volcanic rocks are interbedded with locally derived sedimentary rocks that filled depressions within the extended terrane.
The extensional fault system, associated syntectonic

basins, and younger high-angle faults are important controls on the distribution of mineral resources in the study area (Spencer and Welty, 1985, 1989). Mineral exploration in western Arizona and southeastern California has focused on these geologic terranes, and some deposits and prospects are known (Sherborne and others, 1979; Wilkins and Heidrick, 1982; Wilkinson and others, 1988; Spencer and others, 1988; Lehman and Spencer, 1989).
Identified Resources
Mining and prospecting activity has taken place in the Owens and Mesa mineral districts of Spencer and Welty (1989) located in the northeastern and northern parts of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area (fig. 2). Minor production of silver, gold, copper, lead, zinc, and manganese is recorded from these districts. The Swansea mineral district is immediately south and southwest of the study area and the Planet mineral district is west of the study area. Significant amounts of copper, silver, and minor gold have been produced from these districts (Spencer and Welty, 1989, p.

8
AREA OF MAP
To Parker To AZ 95

114•oo·

113°45'

Casteneda Hills

I \

/ /

/

/

'%" £1\ \

~:;t
/

\/

\ \'0.
~Co' /

\)\<'-/ /
/

APPROXIMATE BOUNDARY

,..--'\."'

OF ,.."""" \

SWANSEA

//

\

•WILDERNESS STUDY AREA /

\

/\

/
/ /

' R-'lJ.v.
I 'lftD/2

'-~minerMaelsadistrict

.......---~ \

....,....,/ \

/ .----·-. .........

A1QJ, v'fVI'J:.<lJ\rs

-· \ / Cleopatra "-.

i mineral district \

\ ........___________,..)(.-.,

~
<., ~

·...._X Black
mineral

Burro district

...~0 0~~
0
/-......__ /

Alamo Dam /·--- ........
\\
\ '-.J·, __ ./ mAilnaemraol

' , ~ii~~~~ ~~~Ytt

district

.................... ('\-·-.'\.

' ,'-........./ u~" f',~s

BUCKSKIN

'-~~0

'\

'0

SMILES

\ \

\

\

Figure 1. Index map showing location of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona. Dashdot lines, approximate boundaries of mineral districts near the study area from Keith and others (1983a, b) and Spencer and Welty (1985, 1989).

C2 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

224-225) (figs. 1 and 2). No identified resources are present in the study area.
• Mineral Resource Potential
Moderate, high, and low potential for base and precious metals (copper, lead, zinc, gold, and silver) exists in the Swansea Wilderness Study Area (fig. 2). These areas are located along high-angle faults in the northeastern part of the study area and along the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault and related upper plate faults in the northern and southern parts of the study area. Areas of high potential for these elements are defmed by favorable geologic and geochemical data in the study area and by past production from mines. Areas of high potential for manganese and low potential for uranium and vanadium are found in the Tertiary sedimentary and volcanic rocks in the northern parts of the study area. Low resource potential for manganese, uranium, and vanadium exists in the southeastern part of the study area. No resource potential for oil and gas resources exists in the study area.
INTRODUCTION
This mineral survey was requested by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management and is the result of a cooperative effort by the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Bureau of Mines. An introduction to the wilderness review process, mineral survey methods, and agency responsibilities was provided by Beikman and others (1983). Goudarzi (1984) discussed mineral assessment methodology and terminology as they apply to these surveys. The U.S. Bureau of Mines evaluates identified resources at individual mines and known mineralized areas by collecting data on current and past mining activities and through field examination of mines, prospects, claims, and mineralized areas. Identified resources are classified according to a system modified from that described by McKelvey (1972) and U.S. Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey (1980). U.S. Geological Survey studies are designed to provide a scientific basis for assessing the potential for undiscovered mineral resources by determining geologic units and structures, possible environmentS of mineral deposition, presence of geochemical and geophysical anomalies, and applicable ore-deposit models. See appendixes for the definition of levels of mineral resource potential and certainty of assessment and for the resource/reserve classification.
Location and Physiography
The Swansea Wilderness Study area (AZ-050--015A) covers approximately 15,755 acres in west-central Arizona,

about 20 mi east of Parker, Arizona (fig. 1). The study area straddles the Bill Williams River, which separates the Rawhide Mountains on the north from the Buckskin Mountains on the south. Alamo Dam, 13 mi east of the study area, controls the flow of the Bill Williams River, and the water level is normally kept low, providing numerous fording points. The part of the study area north of the river is in Mohave County, and that part south of the river is in La Paz County.
The main access to the study area is by Swansea Road east from Arizona Highway 95 south of Parker to the ghost town of Swansea, which is 1 mi south of the study area. Another access road extends east from Arizona Highway 95 along the south side of the Bill Williams River as far as Planet Ranch, where a branch road turns south to 'intersect the Swansea Road. An unimproved pipeline road continues northeast from Swansea, skirting the southeast boundary of the study area to a ford across the Bill Williams River and then continues north near the eastern side of the study area. The study area also can be accessed by unimproved roads from the north, northeast, and southeast. A private inholding, a Railroad Grant issued in 1922, consists of sec. 7, T. 10 N., R. 15 W. and has no access.
The vegetation of the study area is classified as Sonoran Desert scrub, and the main subdivision found in the study areas is the Arizona Upland subdivision (Brown, 1982). The Arizona Upland subdivision is a shrubland or low woodland of legwninous trees with open areas of shrubs and cacti. Cacti are important in this subdivision, and 20 species of cacti are largely confined to or best represented in the Arizona Upland subdivision. Major areas of the Lower Colorado River subdivision of the Sonoran Desert also are found in the study area, especially in the Buckskin Mountains. Locally common riparian areas and wetland meadows are found around seeps, streams and washes. The dominant shrubs and cacti include cholla (Opuntia spp.), saguaro (Carnegiea gigantea), creosote bush (Larrea tridentata), and littleleaf paloverde (Cercidium microphylum).
Previous Work
Early descriptions of the rock types and various mineral deposits in the Rawhide and Buckskin Mountains are found in Lee (1908), Bancroft (1911), and Jones and Ransome (1920). That part of the Rawhide Mountains east of the study area was mapped by Shackelford (1976, 1989). The region north of the Bill Williams River, including the northern part of the study area, was mapped by Suneson and Lucchitta (1979, 1983) and Suneson (1980). Osborne (1981), Woodward (1981), Wilkins and Heidrick (1982), and Spencer and Reynolds (1987) mapped the Tertiary rocks and structures in the area of Swansea mine and Copper Penny prospect Geologists from the Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology have studied the geologic

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz.and Mohave Counties, Arizona

C3

setting of the mineral occurrences within the region (Keith, 1978; Keith and others, 1983a, b; Welty and others, 1985; Spencer and Reynolds, 1986; Spencer and Welty, 1986, 1989; Reynolds and Spencer, 1989; Spencer and others, 1988, 1989) and their work has been invaluable during the course of this mineral resource investigation. Spencer and Welty (1989) defined mineral districts throughout the region, including the study area, and their district names are used in this report.
Studies in the Planet and Swansea mineral districts by Wilkins and Heidrick (1982), Lehman and others (1987), and Lehman and Spencer (1989) demonstrated the ties between the varied structures in the extensional terrane and the base- and precious-metal deposits in the region. Based on this work, other areas outside the study area have been actively explored for precious- and base-metal deposits (Wilkins and others, 1986; Spencer and others, 1988; Wilkinson and others, 1988). A similar link between manganese deposits in the Artillery Mountains and uraniumvanadium deposits in the Date Creek Basin, some 30 mi east of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, has also been proposed (Lasky and Webber, 1949; Sherborne and others, 1979; Otton, 1981; Spencer and Welty, 1989; Spencer and others, 1989). Results of this work are applicable to the mineral resource potential of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area.
Methods of Study
The U.S. Geological Survey conducted detailed field investigation of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area in the winter of 1987 and 1988. This work included geologic mapping at a scale of 1:62,500, geochemical sampling, and the examination of outcrops for evidence of mineralization. Rocks and stream sediments were collected and analyzed for 35 to 37 elements by semiquantitative emission spectrography and for arsenic, antimony, bismuth, cadmium, gold, and zinc by atomic absorption methods. Regional gravity and aeromagnetic surveys were used in the assessment Landsat thematic mapper images were interpreted for evidence of hydrothennal alteration in the study area. Further details on each analytical procedure used for this resource assessment are given later.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the National Mineral Resources Assessment Program of the U.S. Geological Survey. Discussions with J.E. Spencer and SJ. Reynolds of the Arizona Geological Survey and Bruce Bryant of the U.S. Geological Survey improved our understanding of the geology of the area. A special thanks is extended to Diana Mangan for preparation of the figures and to Carol Ostergren

and Nobie Amamoto for patiently overseeing the fmal publication of the bulletin.
•
APPRAISAL OF IDENTIFIED RESOURCES AND KNOWN MINERALIZED AREAS
I
By George S. Ryan U.S. Bureau ofMines
Methods of Investigation
A review of literature, maps, and unpublished material related to mineral occurrences and mining activities in or near the Swansea Wilderness Study Area was completed before any field work was undertaken. Master title plats and Bureau of Land Management records were checked to locate oil and gas leases and mineral claims in the study area.
Two geologists conducted a 12-day field examination in the study area and vicinity. Thirty-seven samples were taken from adits, mines, prospects, and outcrops. All samples were analyzed for 32 elements by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry and for gold and silver by fire assay. Eighteen samples were assayed for barium and copper by the atomic absorption method, and five samples were analyzed for manganese using neutron activation methods. All analyses were done by the Chemex Lab, Inc., Sparks, Nevada. A summary of the geochemical data is available in Ryan (1989). The complete analytical data are available for inspection at the U.S. Bureau of Mines,' · Intennountain Field Operations Center, Building 20, Denver Federal Center, Denver, CO 80225.
Mining History
Early mining near the study area consisted of Indian diggings in thick hematite layers found at the Mineral Hill and Plapet mine areas, 6 to 8 mi west of the study area. Also, the "coyote holes" along copper carbonate horizons at Mineral Hill are ascribed to the Indians or possibly the Spanish (Paul Konow, oral commun., Mineral Hill prospector, 1988). Larger scale copper milling began at the Planet and Swansea districts in the 1860's and steady production was sustained during the 1880's. Later, the declining price of copper resulted in intermittent closing of the mines for several years at a time. ·
The southern part of the study area lies in the Swansea mineral district (fig. 1). The Mesa mineral district encompasses Black Mesa north of the Bill Williams River, and the Owens mineral district is in the northeastern part of the study area north of the Bill Williams River. Other mineral districts within 12 mi of the study area include the Planet

C4 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

and Clara. Recorded production from all districts includes some 930 troy ounces (oz) of gold, 43,700 troy oz of silver, 24,000 tons of copper, 32 tons of lead, less than 1 ton of zinc, and 300 tons of manganese ore at an unspecified grade (Keith, 1978, p. 67; Kreidler, 1986, p. 5; Spencer and Welty, 1989, p. 224). The total production includes manganese ore produced during World War II from the Mesa Manganese Prospect on the northeast boundary of the study area (Ryan, 1989). Although most mining had ceased by 1942, one unidentified mine produced copper until the 1970's (Keith, 1978, p. 71).
Placer gold has been produced from the Clara mining district, 4 mi southeast of the study area, and placer claims have been located northeast, east, and northwest of the study area. At the time of this investigation, no mining activity was being conducted in any of the areas.
Though some exploration drilling has been conducted near the Swansea mine (fig. 2, No. 1) Copper Penny prospect, (fig. 2, No. 2), and in the Planet mineral district (fig. 1) in the last 10 years (Wilkins and Heidrick, 1982; Lehman and others, 1987), no mineral development or production has resulted. As of July 1988, no mining claims had been staked in the study area and no exploration activities were observed.
Oil and Gas
Petroleum resources are considered to be nonexistent in the study area because of the middle Tertiary metamorphic and tectonic history. Ryder (1983, p. C-19) rates the oil and gas potential of the region of the study area as low because the organic content, reservoir quality, and thermal history of the rocks are not conducive to the generation or preservation of significant volumes of hydrocarbons. As of August, 1988, no active oil or gas leases were extant in the study area.
Appraisal of Sites Examined
In the study area, mineral production has taken place in the Owens mineral district north of the Bill Williams River. Elsewhere, prospect pits, bulldozer cuts, near surface slopes, adits, or shafts are found in the northern, west-central, and southwestern parts of the area (Ryan, 1989). Evidence of manganese and copper oxides and carbonate minerals in association with hematite or specularite are present locally.
The Mesa Manganese prospect (fig. 2, No. 3) consists of two small adjoining stopes near the surface on the east side of Black Mesa in the northern part of the study area (Ryan, 1989). The manganese is in lenses in a megabreccia of Paleozoic limestone and quartzite that lies in the upper plate of the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault. It

is estimated that about 150 tons of low-grade ore was removed during World War II. One sample of residual material at the entry to one of the stopes assayed 10.9 percent manganese oxide (MnO), whereas another sample, from a trench northwest of the slOpes, assayed 20.3 percent MnO. This last sample is probably more representative of the material that was mined (Ryan, 1989). Most samples from the prospect area contain minor silver and elevated concentrations of barium.
A 265-ft-long exploration adit lies in a side drainage leading into the wash that drains from the area of the Swansea mine across the southeast comer of the study area and terminates at the Bill Williams River (fig. 2, No. 4). The adit is at the base of a rugged cliff in which no structure or minerals were observed. The adit crosses several moderately to steeply dipping faults that strike northwest and north (Ryan, 1989). Five chip samples were taken in the adit from crosscutting faults. Two samples from a 2-ftwide, hematite-stained, northwest-striking fault zone contain 0.015 troy ounces of gold per short ton (oz/st), 1,5IO and 4,500 part per million (ppm) of barium, 1,755 and 2,050 ppm lead, and 2,400 and 3,930 ppm zinc (Ryan, 1989). These concentrations are considered typical of those found along the northwest-striking high-angle faults that cut the lower plate mylonitic gneisses.
Caved adits, shafts, and prospect pits north of the Bill Williams River are in the Owens mineral district, located in the northeastern part of the study area. Many of the caved adits are probably less than 30-ft long, based upon the amount of subsidence and the dump size. At least one shaft in sec. 4, T. 10 N., R. 15 W. may account for some of the limited production of metals in the district The shaft is caved and inaccessible, but a sample taken from the site of a loading bin contains 3.6 weight-percent copper and less than 15 weight-percent iron. Other samples collected in the area of the shaft were from pits, caved adits, and outcrops containing copper carbonates and oxides and ubiquitous specularite. These samples contain elevated concentrations of copper and iron and some also contain about 1,420 ppm manganese (Ryan, 1989). One sample also contains 415 ppm strontium and another sample from a caved adit contains 0.01 troy ounces per ton silver.
Elevated concentrations of arsenic, barium, magnesium, lead, strontium, and zinc found in various samples throughout the study area are consistent with the suite of minerals noted at the older producing properties in the region (Harrer, 1964, p. 143; Ryan, 1989). Hematite or specularite is found at most of the workings examined. Chloritic alteration, noted as being typical of detachmentrelated lower-plate mineralization (Reynolds, 1980, p. 7), also was found at all of the workings examined in the study area except the Mesa Manganese prospect. The presence of oxide, carbonate, silicate, and sulfate minerals suggest that conditions during deposition were oxidizing and that the minerals probably formed at a shallow depth. More reduced,

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

CS

sulfide-rich assemblages may be present at depth (Wodzicki and others, 1982, p. 94).
Quantities of sand and gravel are readily available along the Bill Williams River and its tributaries. However, the material in the study area has no unique characteristics that would make it more desirable than similar deposits outside the study area. The desert environment of southern Arizona provides numerous sources of similar material closer to population centers.
Conclusions
The Swansea Wilderness Study Area contains no identified metallic mineral resources. Mineral assemblages in the various samples taken in the study area are similar to those noted in epithermal deposits found in various structural settings in the Tertiary extensional terrane of Arizona, as described by Spencer and Welty (1989). These minerals suggest the possibility of unidentified subsurface occurrences.
· The metamorphic rocks that underlie much of the study area and the lack of significant sedimentary basins preclude oil and gas resources.
Sand and gravel in the study area has no unique characteristics that would make it more desirable than similar deposits outside the study area and closer to population centers.
ASSESSMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCE POTENTIAL
By Richard M. Tosdal, Robert G. Eppinger, H. Richard Blank, Jr., Daniel H. Knepper, Jr., Andrea J. Gallagher, and James A. Pitkin U.S. Geological Survey
Geology
The Swansea Wilderness Study area lies in the northwest-trending belt of metamorphic core complexes in westcentral Arizona (Rehrig and Reynolds, 1980). In these complexes, mid-crustal and deeper rocks in the lower plate were tectonically transported to the surface along shallowdipping normal faults or detachment faults during a period of extensional tec~nism in the late Oligocene and Miocene (Spencer and Reynolds, 1989). Hydrothermal fluid circulation and mineralization accompanied extensional deformation (Spencer and Welty, 1989). Seveial deposits in the region that were formed during the extensional deformation have been mined and explored for their base and precious metals and for manganese, uranium, and vanadium. The detachment fault in the map area is known as the Buckskin-

Rawhide detachment fault of Spencer and Reynolds (1986, 1989). It crosses the northern half of the study area and crops out discontinuously along the southern border of. the study area (fig. 2).
The geology of the study area can be divided into three parts (fig. 2). The upper and lower plates of the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault compose two parts. The posttectonic rocks that include rocks deposited in depres- · sions within the extended terrane and modern alluvial deposits along washes and the Bill Williams River form the third.
Part of the upper plate terrane consists of Proterozoic, Paleozoic, and Mesozoic igneous and metamorphic rocks that had complex geologic histories prior to extensional deformation in the Tertiary (Reynolds and Spencer, 1989). Currently these rocks are fault-bounded and commonly intensely brecciated and fractured as a result of the extensional deformation. Within the fault-bounded blocks, thrust faults and folds of probable Cretaceous age complicate the stratigraphy of these rocks (Reynolds and Spencer, 1989). Tertiary volcanic and sedimentary rocks unconformably overlie the older rocks and make up the remainder of the upper plate terrane (Davis and others, 1980; Suneson, 1980; Suneson and Lucchitta, 1983; Spencer and Reynolds, 1986, 1989). The Tertiary rocks were deposited during regional extension.
The lower plate terrane consists of Tertiary mylonitic rocks derived from Proterozoic layered mafic, granitic, and pegmatitic gneiss and the Tertiary Swansea Plutonic Suite (Bryant and Wooden, 1989). These rocks are characterized by a subhorizontal mylonitic foliation and an accompanying northwest-trending elongation lineation. Mylonitic deformation in the lower plate is considered to be a deeper level expression of, and slightly older than, brittle extensional faulting along the detachment fault and the upper plate (Spencer and Reynolds, 1986; Howard and John, 1987; Davis and Lister, 1988).
, During the last stages of, or after the end of, the extensional deformation, high-angle faults cut the detachment terrane. Some of these faults have reverse motion in areas east of the study area (Shackleford, 1976; Spencer, 1989). Within the study area and elsewhere in the region, these faults were the sites of epithermal mineralization (Spencer and Welty, 1989).
Posttectonic rocks are common north of the Bill Williams River and sparse south of the river. The rocks are here divided into two broad units. The older unit consists of subhorizontal volcanic and sedimentary rocks of Miocene age that were deposited in depressions within the extensional terrane. To the west of, and within, the study area, basalt is the most common posttectonic volcanic rock and typically erodes to form mesas (Suneson and Lucchitta, 1979, 1983; Suneson, 1980). Black Mesa, north of the Bill Williams River, is one example. Less extensive younger megaporphyritic basalt of presumed late Miocene age is present

C6 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

in the northern part of ilie study area and in adjoining areas where n~ fAlls prueovalleys (Sunesollll, 1980). Rlhyolli~e occwrs Rocaily and! foms mos~ of ahe Casteneda Hills nmmediateny north of ilie stMdy area (fig. 1; Sooesollll, 1980; Samesollll and! Lucchitaa, 1983). Conglomerate and! sandstone, composed! of nocaUy derived detritus, also are commollll and characterize ilie oRder post-detachment rocks south of ilie study area im tile Buckskin Mountains llllear Swansea.
The younger posttectonic units consis~ of unconsolidated! to poorly consolidated sandstone and! conglomemte and alluvium of late Tertiary and! Quaternary age ilia~ unconformably overlie older rock units. These rocks were deposited in alluvial! fan and in fluvial! environments. Mynonitic rocks of tile Rower plate are a major source of detritus for iliese rocks. The sandstone and! conglomerate now crop out in moderately dissected fans and! as !terrace gravels above ilie modem washes. The alluvium is along the modem washes and in the larger valleys.
A reconnaissance geochemical survey of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area was conducted in May 1988 to aid in abe mineral! resource evaluation. The principal geochemical! sampling media were stream sediments and heavymineral concentrates, collected a~ 55 sites within tile study area. A stream-sediment sample represents a composite of the rocks and! soils exposed in the drainage basirn. The nonmagnetic fraction of a heavy-mineral-concentrate sample is useful in detecting mineralized! areas because primary and! secondary ore minerals are commonly found in this fraction. The concentration of ore and! ore-related minerals in the heavy-mineral-concentrate sample facilitates determination of elements that are not easily detected in bulk stream sediments. Rock samples provide information on background metal concentrations in unaltered bedrock and information on anomalous metal suites in mineralized areas.
This geochemicall survey was designed to locate altered, mineralized, or geochemically anomalous areas, but not to fmdl individual mineral deposits. Detailed follow-up geochemical studies in areas of anomalous metal concentrations found in this reconnaissance study were not undertaken.
Stream-sediment and !heavy-mineral-concentrate samples were collected from active alluvial channels generally along frrst-order streams. Each heavy-mineral-concentrate sample was separated into magnetic, slightly magnetic, and nonmagnetic fractions using an electromagnet in the

Raboratory. Nonmagnetic fractions were examined for mineralogical! content; nhese frnctions andlltlhe sXightlly magnetic heavy-minemll-concelllltmte fractions were pulverized! for chemical! anallysis, and! ltlhe maglllletic fractiollll was arclhivedl. Rock sampRes were examined microscopica!Ry and ilieirn plUlRverizedl for clhlemicall anallysis.
Stream sOOimen~ and rock sampRes were anallyzedl for 35 eRements, and! ilie heavy-mineraR concentrate samples were arnallyzedl for ilie same eRements and! pRattinum Mdl paiadl.iii.RID, al!R ll>y semiqwmtitative emissiollll specttrogrnplmy. Kllll adlditiollll, stream sedimellllts and! rocks were anaRyzedlll>y more sensitive atomic-all>sorptiollll meltlhods for arsenic, ll>ismMili, cadmiW111l, antimony, and! zmc. Stream-sediment and rock samples were ana.Ryzedl for Row-ReveR gold concentrations (detectiollll Rimit 50 parts per lbiHiollll (ppb) for stream sediments, 2pp1b for rocks) by atomic absorption methods.
Histograms showing lllhe genernll distributiollll and! rnnge of the data were constructed for selected elements. Boundaries between background! and anomalous element concernttations were chosen using histograms, percentiles, and average crustal abundances for elements givellll by Levmson (1980). AnalyticaR results and full descriptions of sampling
and! analytical techniques are found! mEppinger and others
(1990a, b).
Geochemical anomalies Rikely related to lithologic differences and! 00 mineralization were founcll n1rn samples
from the study area. Anomalies possibly relate<ll oo miner-
alization are found in 6 areas in ilie study area and are shown in figure 3. Gold was detected fum only 1 llllorunagnetic heavy-mineral-concentrate sample and! in only 2 rock samples, in areas 1 and! 6, discussed! below. Anomalous concentrations of silver, copper, lead, zinc, arsenic, barium, bismuth, cobal~, iron, molybdenum, manganese, antimony, . tin, thorium, vanadium, and tungsten were fooodl irn samples from the study area Anomalous concentrations of metals in stream-sediment and heavy-minerall-concerntrate samples,
their rnnges, and the threshold! values used mthis study are
listed in table 1. Two distinct geochemical suites that llikely represent
two different rock types are apparent mthe samples. One
is a barium-nickel suite nrn stream-sedimen~ and! heavy-mi~rn­ eraR-concentrate samples draining Miocene basalt Ollll Black Mesa. The other is a lanthanum-yttrhl!m-ruobium suite fum stream-sediment and! heavy-mineral-concentrate samples
derived from wee Ra.rge areas in abe southern and! central
parts of ahe study area. The latter association, commorn to granitic \terrains, nike!y represents granitic phases within tile lower plate crystalline rocks underlying ilie majority of lllhe study area. Sphene contains these elements (Deer and! others, 1962) and! is tile dominant mineral phase in heavymineral-concentrate samples rich in these elements.

Samples from area 1 contain the highest concentrations found in this study for several metals, including arsenic, copper, molybdenum, lead, antimony, tin, vanadium, tungsten, and zinc. Other metals present in anomalous concentrations include silver, barium, bismuth, and elements in slightly anomalous concentrations include cobalt, iron, and thorium. Ore-related minerals identified in nonmagnetic heavy-mineral-concentrate samples include abundant fluorite and barite, lesser vanadinite, descloizite, and malleable lead, and trace amounts of pyrite, scheelite, and thorite. Both rock samples containing detectable gold are from this area (quartz vein, 2 ppb gold; siliceous mylonite, 20 ppb gold). The area is dominated by lower plate mylonitic rocks, though the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault and associated syndetachment breccias, carbonate minerals, and retrograde chlorite-rich gneisses are found locally (fig. 2; Spencer, 1989). Several small chrysocolla- and specularitebearing prospects and an adit in the south end of area 1 are near the detachment fault.
Area 2 contains samples with anomalous concentrations of silver, arsenic, barium, cobalt, copper, lead, vanadium, tungsten, and zinc and slightly anomalous concentrations of molybdenum and thorium. Ore-related minerals identified in nonmagnetic heavy-mineral-concentrate samples include barite and fluorite, small amounts of vanadinite and chrysocolla, and trace amounts of wulfenite, pyrite, and scheelite. Bedrock in the area· is predominantly mylonitic gneiss. Cobbles of carbonate-rich, chloritic, and metasedimentary rocks common to the upper plate terrane and the areas adjoining detachment faults were observed in sampled drainages. These rocks crop out upstream from the major wash that crosses this area.
Anomalous concentrations of metals in area 3 include barium, copper, iron, and vanadium and slightly anomalous concentrations of arsenic, cobalt, and molybdenum. Abundant fluorite, moderate amounts of barite, and trace amounts of pyrite, chrysocolla, cuprite, native copper, and malleable lead were identified in nonmagnetic heavy-mineral-concentrate samples. Lower plate mylonitic gneiss crops out throughout area 3. Northwest-trending, and locally mineralized, high-angle faults cut the gneiss. No detachment fault or upper plate rocks are known in the area (fig. 2). Cobbles of retrograde gneiss were observed locally, and chrysocollamalachite-epidote-specularite cobbles were observed in three drainag~s. Shafts and adits along high-angle faults are upwash from the geochemical sample sites in two of these drainages. Ryan (1989) reports anomalous copper, iron, manganese, and silver from the area of these shafts.
~ilver, arsenic, and lead are found in slightly anomalous concentrations in stream-sediment and nonmagnetic heavy-mineral-concentrate samples from area 4, along with trace amounts of pyrite and malleable lead in nonmagnetic heavy-mineral-concentrate samples. Sparse chrysocolla and specularite are in the alluvium at one site. Lower plate mylonitic crystalline rocks throughout the area are cut by

high-angle fractures and small faults. Many cobbles of lower plate gneiss in the washes are strongly chloritized and epidotized.
Anomalous concentrations of metals in samples from
area 5 include barium, iron, manganese, nickel, lead, vana-
dium, zinc, and slightly anomalous silver, arsenic, lead, antimony, and thorium. Abundant barite, small amo~nts of fluorite, and trace amounts of pyrite were observed in heavy-
mineral-concentrate samples. Arroyos in area 5 drain the
east side of Black Mesa, a west-dipping mesa capped by postdetachment Miocene basalt. Upper plate volcanic and sedimentary rocks crop out along the east flank of the mesa (fig. 2). Cobbles of sandstone, conglomerate, vein quartz, biotite gneiss, muscovite schist, and granitic rocks were observed in drainages. A manganese prospect is present in the area (Ryan, 1989).
Samples from area 6 contain anomalous concentrations of gold, silver, barium, lead, tin, and thorium. Gold (700 ppm) and silver (70 ppm) were found in a single heavymineral-concentrate sample along the south edge of area 6. Abundant barite, and trace amounts of fluorite, pyrite, hematite pseudomorphs after pyrite, and paraschachnerite, a silver-mercury alloy, were observed in several samples in area 6. Bedrock in the area is almost exclusively Tertiary postdetachment basalt, although cobbles of lower plate mylonitic gneiss were observed in one drainage.
Interpretation
The strong anomalous concentrations of silver, arsenic, barium, copper, molybdenum, lead, antimony, tin, vanadium, tungsten, and zinc and slightly anomalous concentrations of bismuth, cobalt, iron, thorium, and gold and abundant ore-related minerals in heavy-mineral-concentrate samples from area 1 are likely related to mineralization associated with the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment surface, which crops out locally. The large extent of the geochemical anomaly relative to the mapped exposures of the detachment surface suggests that lower plate rocks are more mineralized here than elsewhere in the study area. A possible reason for more metal-rich lower plate rocks in area 1 is that these rocks may be erosional remnants of a relatively metal-rich zone that enveloped a detachment fault. In this model, the detachment fault would have been present prior to erosion a short distance above the bedrock outcrops in the area. Mineralization in lower plate rocks within this envelope may result from replacement, dissemination, or fractUre filling in the lower plate gneisses immediately beneath the detachment fault, as described by Spencer and Welty (1989).
The anomalous concentrations of silver, arsenic, barium, cobalt, copper, lead, vanadium, tungsten, and zinc, slightly anomalous concentrations of molybdenum and thorium, and the ore-related minerals observed in heavy-mineral-concentrate samples in area 2 are similar to those found

C8 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

in area 1. The Buckskin-Rawhide detachment surface does not crop out in this area but crops out just outside the study area (fig. 2; Spencer, 1989). The carbonate-rich and chloritic gneiss observed in .alluvium from area 2 indicates the proximity of a detachment surface. The sources of these geochemical anomalies and ore-related minerals in area 2 are likely similar to those postulated for area 1.
The anomalous concentrations of barium, copper, iron, and vanadium, slightly anomalous concentrations of arsenic, cobalt, and molybdenum, and ore-related minerals in area 3 are probably related to mineralized ground similar to that explored by shafts and adits in 2 of the 10 drainages included in the area. The anomalous concentrations of metals and ore-related minerals found within this relatively large area likely are due to a more widespread presence of mineralized rocks than the area presently indicated by known shafts and adits. The geochemical suite and ore-related minerals observed in area 3 are not so complete as those in areas 1 and 2, but nevertheless are likely the result of similar mineralizing processes during extensional faulting and subsequent high-angle faulting.
Weakly anomalous concentrations of silver, arsenic, and lead in area 4 are probably due to mineralizing processes like those in areas 1, 2, and 3. However, the relatively low-level concentrations of these metals, coupled with the pa1,1city of ore-related minerals found in samples from area 4, suggest that mineralized rocks are not extensive at present levels of exposure.
The anomalous concentrations of barium, iron, manganese, nickel, lead, vanadium, and zinc and the slightly anomalous concentrations of silver, arsenic, lead, antimony, and thorium in area 5 may have at least three origins. One, much of the bedrock in the area is of basaltic composition, which tends to be enriched in many of the above metals. Two, the anomalous concentrations of metals may result from the adsorption of the metals onto manganese and iron oxides, as both manganese and iron are found in anomalous concentrations in the samples. These absorbed metals may reflect mineralization related to the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault, as manganese has been mined in upper plate rocks in the region. Three, unrecognized epithermal deposits may be present in and along the detachment fault Pyrite and fluorite are found in heavy-mineral concentrate samples from this area, as they are in areas 1 and 2, where the detachment fault is proximal.
Barite in area 6 is likely derived from extensive outcrops of basalt in the area. However, the elevated concentrations of gold and silver in one heavy-mineral-concentrate sample, anomalous concentrations of lead in another heavymineral concentrate, and the presence of tin, thorium, and trace amounts of fluorite, paraschachnerite, and pyrite in several heavy-mineral-concentrate samples from the area are problematic. These metals and minerals are not generally associated with basalt. Further studies are necessary to determine the origin of the anomalous elements, pyrite, and

fluorite in samples from basalt in area 6. Malleable lead and paraschachnerite were observed
in several heavy-mineral-concentrate samples, the fonner in samples from areas 1, 3, and 4, and the latter in samples from area 6. These occurrences are interpreted to be of anthropogenic origin and probably introduced during past mining activity from precious-metal recovery processes using mercury amalgamation and as solder from food cans or from lead shot
Geophysical Studies
Aeromagnetics and Gravity
Aeromagnetic and gravity data for a region encompassing the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains and including the Swansea Wilderness Study Area were compiled from available data sources. Two somces of aeromagnetic data were utilized: a survey of the Prescott, Arizona 1o by 2° quadrangle flown in support of the National Uranium Resource Evaluation (NURE) program and a survey of the Needles 1° by 2° quadrangle, California and Arizona, flown for the USGS (Western Geophysical Company, 1979; U.S. Geological Survey, 1981). The NURE traverses were made on east-west headings at spacings of 1 mi and a nominal height of 400 ft above ground. The USGS traverses were similarly on east-west headings but at 0.5-mi spacings and a nominal drape height of 1,000 ft. Gravity data were obtained from files of the Defense Mapping Agency (DMA) through the National Center for Solar-Terrestrial and Geophysical Data (Boulder, CO 80303). No new geophysical field work was performed for the present investigation.
The residual total-intensity aeromagnetic field for the 800-mi2 region surrounding the Swansea Wilderness Study Area reveals three features pertinent to the study area (fig. 4). One, a striking contrast in magnetic expression is evident between the postdetachment volcanic rocks, chiefly basalts, that produce intense short-wavelength anomalies and the rocks affected by the extensional defonnation that produce much more subdued and longer wavelength anomalies. The boundary between these two magnetic domains traces an arc across the region. The study area lies mostly east of the domain of short-wavelength anomalies. Two, in the terrane affected by the extensional deformation, the aeromagnetic data trace out long-wavelength, northeasttrending anomaly highs and lows that correspond approximately to the corrugations in the detachment terrane. In this terrane, the mylonitic rocks in the lower plate form the antiformal arches and the faulted rocks in the upper plate crop out in the synfonnal troughs (Spencer and Reynolds, 1989). Metallic mineral deposits are most prevalent in the synfonnal troughs (Spencer and Welty, 1989). The magnetic highs crossing the study area overlie the mylonitic rocks in the lower plate, whereas the magnetic lows overlie

/

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

C9

•D
D
B
c
D

EXPLANATION
Areas having high mineral resource potential (H)
Areas having moderate mineral resource potential (M)
Areas having low mineral resource potential (L)
Level of certainty of assessment Data only suggest level of potential Data give good indication of level of potential Data clearly define level of potential

Commodities
Ag Silver
Au Gold Cu Copper Mn Manganese
Pb Lead
u Uranium v Vanadium
Zn Zinc

Mines, prospects, and adits 1 Swansea mine 2 Copper Penny prospect 3 Mesa prospect 4 Unnamed adil

Geologic map units Post detachment rocks
Qal Alluvial deposits (Quaternary) Qt Talus deposits (Quaternary)
Qs Sand and gravel (Quaternary) QTc Conglomerate and sandstone (MJ,oce:ne)ll-- - -4 Tm Megacryst basalt (Miocene) Tb Basalt (Miocene) Tc Conglomerate and sandstone (Miocene) L·Q· 0-.~:::y:;,

8
AREA OF MAP

34 10' _ _ Contact

Tvs
Mzs Pzs
g
mg

Upper plate rocks Volcanic and sedimentary rocks (Miocene and Oligocene?) Sedimentary and volcanic rocks (Mesozoic) Sedimentary rocks (Paleozoic) Granitic rocks (Mesozoic and (or) Proterozoic)
Lower plate rocks Mylonitic gneiss, undivided (Tertiary, Mesozoic, Paleozoic, and Proterozoic)

----- Fault-Dashed where inferred, dotted where coocealcd
~ ... Thrust fault-Dotted where concca1cd; sawteeth on upper plate
~ ··· Buckskin-Rawhide detachment faultDotted where coocealed; ticks on upper plate

Figure 2. Map showing mineral resource potential and generalized geology of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona. Base from U.S. Geological Survey 1:62,500-scale Swansea and Casteneda Hills quadrangles, 1966. Contour interval 80 ft. Geology north of Bill Williams River is modified from Suneson (1980) and Shackelford (1976, 1989). Geology around Swansea and Copper Penny is modified from Spencer and Reynolds (1987).
Geology of rest of area by R.M. Tosdal (1987) and modified from Spencer (1989).

........_.,,,,.,..,found in anomalous concentrations~'
/;;-

Silver

Mo Molybdenum:!/

Arsenic

Ni Nickel

"

Gold Pb I...e:crl

Sb Antimony

Sn Tin

V Vanadium

W Tungsten

Zn Zinc

Fluorite content from nonmagnetic
heavy-mineral concentrate
0 Trace (<1 percent)
D0 1-20 percent More than 20 percent

Figure 3. Geochemical anomalies from stream-sediment, heavy-mineral-concentrate, and rock samples from the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona. Elements and minerals in parenthesis denote slightly anomalous concentrations.. See text for discussion of anomalous areas 1-6. Contours are in feet.
C12 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

Table 1. Summary data for elements found in anomalous concentrations in stream-sediment and heavymineral-concentrate samples in the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, Arizona
[lower limits of analytical determination are shown in parentheses. N, not detected; l, detected but lower than determination limit; G, greater than upper determination limit;%, percent, n, number of determinations. Analyses are by emission spectrography except for elements with an "-a" suffix, which are by atomic absorption methods. Values are in parts per million unless noted otherwise.)

Element Minimum

Ag (1) As (500) Au (20) Ba (50) Bi (20) Cu (10) Mo (10) Pb (20) Sb (200) Sn (20) Th (200)
v (20) w (50)
Zn (500)

N N N 5000 N N N N N N N 20 N N

Co (20) Cu (10) Fe (0.1%) La (100) Mn (20) Mo (10) Ni (10) Pb (20) Th (200)
v (20)
Zn (500)

30 L 3% N 700 N 30 20 N 70 N

Ag (0.5) As-a (5) Ba (20) Cu (5) La (50) Mo (5) Nb (20) Ni (5) Pb (10) .Sb-a (2)
v (10)
y (10) Zn-a (5)

N L 200 7 L N
N 10 20 L 20 15 16

Maximum

50th percentile

Threshold

=Nonmagnetic heavy mineral concentrates (11 SS)

70 1500 700 G(lO,OOO)
L 7000
100 15,000
500 500 700 10,000 200 5000

N N N 1000 N L N 50 N 30 N 100 N N

L L L G(lO,OOO) L 150 L 100 L 100 300 700 L L

=Weakly magnetic heavy mineral concentrates (11 SS)

300 1500
50% 2000 5000
30 1000 1000 300 700 700

100 100
10% 500 1000
L 70 70 L 200
N

=Stream sediments (11 SS)

200 500
30% 1000 5000
15 200 150 200 500
L

1 21 2000 500 200 5 50 200 300
5 500 100 190

N 9 500 30 70 N L 20 30 L 50 30 39

L 15 1500 70 150 5 30 150 70 2 150 70 200

Number of samples above threshold
2 3 1 16 1 6 4 15 2 3 7 7 2 3
8 9 6 12 3 7 9 10 4 3 1
13 8 6 10 8 3 4 2 7 3 ,1 7

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

C13

the extended upper plate rocks. Three, northwest-trending gradients within the aeromagnetic data cut across the northeast-trending highs and lows. Where these gradients overlie bedrock, they correspond to the northwest-trending highangle faults, one of which crosses the southwestern part of the study area. These faults locally contain base- and precious-metal deposits, as in the Alamo and Owens mineral districts (Spencer and Welty, 1989)
The complete Bouguer gravity anomaly field computed from about 165 stations of the DMA set and terraincorrected to 167 km (Hayford-Bowie zones A-0) for the region of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains is shown in figure 5. Across the area of the map is an unexplained nonuniform decrease in anomaly levels to the north-northeast. The steepest part of this gradient transects the study area. Superimposed on this gradient in the region are broad lows that roughly correspond to areas of Tertiary volcanic rocks in the upper plate of the detachment fault.

Remote Sensing
Digital image data acquired by the Thematic Mapper (TM) system on the Landsat-4 satellite (Scene I.D. 4017417383) were analyzed to detect and map areas that may contain hydrothermally altered rocks. The six bands of image data in the visible and near-infrared range were digitally processed to enhance spectral characteristics of minerals that often accompany alteration or are derived from the weathering of altered rocks. Visual interpretation of a vegetation-masked TM color-ratio composite consists of identifying concentrations of limonite (Group 1), hydroxylbearing and (or) hydrated minerals (Group 2), and areas where both groups of minerals occur together (Group 3). Identification of the different groups is based on the spectral responses of the different limonitic minerals in the TM bands (Hunt and Salisbury, 1971, Hunt and Ashley, 1977; Raines, 1977).

Figure 4. Aeromagnetic anomaly map of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona (shaded). Contour interval, 20 nanoteslas; hachured in direction of magnetic low.
C14 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

That part of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area south of a line that projects continuously southwestward from Centennial Wash (fig. 2) contains a fairly uniform distribution of limonite or limonite-group minerals (Group 1). This area is also underlain almost entirely by subhorizontally layered mylonitic mafic and less common granitic gneiss in the lower plate of the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault. The limonitic minerals are inferred to be related to the distribution and weathering of the mylonitic gneiss and not to reflect hydrothermal alteration.
Radioelement Distribution
Natural radioelement distribution in the Swansea Wilderness Study Area was evaluated by examination of

available data from an aerial gamma-ray spectrometric survey of the Prescott 1°. by 2° quadrangle (Western Geophysical Company, 1979). The survey acquired aerial gamma-ray spectrometry data along 1-mi-spaced east-west flightlines at 400 ft above ground level. Nine lines cross the study area and provide about 15 percent ground coverage, because an aerial gamma-ray system at 400 ft above ground level effectively measures terrestrial gamma radiation from a swath 800ft wide along flightline. The 15 percent coverage represents a reconnaissance sampling of the near-surface (0-18 inches depth) distribution of the natural radioelements potassium (K), equivalent uranium (eU), and equivalent thorium (eTh). The prefix e for equivalent denotes the potential for disequilibrium in the uranium and thorium decay series.
Examination of preliminary radioelement contour

FigureS. Bouguer gravity anomaly map of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona (shaded). All data reductions and terrane corrections employed a standard Bouguer density of 2.67 glcm3 and followed conventional U.S. Geological Survey procedures (for example, Cordell and others, 1982). Contour interval, 2 mGals; hachured in direction of closed low; circle, gravity station.

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

C15

maps that include the Swansea Wilderness Study Area indicates that differing radioelement concentrations characterize the northern and southern parts of the study area. Generally, in terranes where crystalline rocks predominate, higher radioelement concentrations relate to more silicic, more radioactive rocks and the detritus derived from them. Lower concentrations relate to less silicic, less radioactive rocks and detritus derived from them. The northern part of the study area has relatively lower concentrations of 0.5 to 1.5 percent K, 2 to 4 ppm eU, and 10 to 15 ppm eTh, which reflect the presence of less radioactive Miocene basalt. The southern part has relatively higher concentrations of 1.5 to 2.0 percent K, 4 to 6 ppm eU, and 15 to 20 ppm eTh, which reflect the presence of more silicic, more radioactive mylonitic gneiss. For the study area as a whole, the radioelement concentrations of 0.5 to 2 percent K, 2 to 6 ppm eU, and 10 to 20 ppm eTh are thought to be usual (not anomalous) levels for the rock types present.

and Mesa mineral districts) (Wilkins and Heidrick, 1982; Welty and others, 1985; Spencer and Welty, 1989). Other
mines are developed along veins in high-angle faults in
lower-plate mylonitic gneiss (Owens mineral district) (Spencer and Welty, 1989).
Based on the known occurrences within the entire region, all areas along the high- and low-angle faults, particularly where reactive (carbonate) rocks are present, are assigned a moderate potential with a certainty level of C for gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc. These areas are in the northern and southern parts of the study area (fig. 2). Geochemical data support this assignment. Areas of high potential with a certainty level of C for gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc are assigned to areas adjoining known mineral occurrences. These areas include the Owens mineral district within the study area and the area in the southeast where the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fa~t crops out (fig. 2). The central part of the study area is assigned a low potential with a certainty level of B for these elements.

Mineral Resource Assessment
The assessment of the mineral resource potential of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area draws upon regional geology, geochemistry, geophysics, mineral occurrence maps, mining claim records, and the available ore deposit models that ·are applicable to the geologic terrane in the study area. These data were used to delineate favorable tracts within the study area, and an estimate of the level of resource potential and degree of certainty for each tract was made using the criteria outlined in the appendixes. I Throughout this discussion, mineral· resource potential refers only to undiscovered mineral resources.
Areas of potential for gold, silver, base metals, manganese, uranium, and vanadium resources are present in the study area. These are outlined on figure 2 and are discussed below. Applicable metallic ore deposit models for the study
area include detachment fault-related base- and precious-
metal deposits (Wilkins and Heidrick, 1982; Wilkins and others, 1986; Spencer and Welty, 1986, 1989), stratabound and fault-controlled manganese deposits (Cox and Singer, 1~86; Spencer and Welty, 1985), and stratabound uranium and vanadium deposits (Sherborne and others, 1979; Otton, 1981; Spencer and Welty, 1985). ·

I Manganese
Mines in the Mesa mineral district in the northern part of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area and to the east in the Black Burro, Lincoln Ranch, and Artillery mineral districts (fig. I) have produced manganese (Keith, 1978;
Keith and others, 1983a, b). The manganese deposits are in
upper plate Tertiary rocks either along high-angle faults or as stratabound deposits (Lasky and Webber, 1949; Spencer and others, 1989). Upper plate Tertiary rocks are present only in small areas in the study area. The area around the Mesa mineral district in the northern part of the study area is assigned a high potential for manganese with a certainty level of D based on the presence of anomalous concentrations of manganese and the evidence of local past production.
Tertiary rocks in the southeastern part of the study area are assigned a low potential for manganese with a certainty level of C based on the presence of permissive rocks and structures (fig. 2). A moderate or high potential for this area is unwarranted because there is no evidence for any manganese in these rocks, either in outcrop or in the geochemical data.

Base and Precious Metals
Base- and precio~s-metal mines and prospects in and adjacent to the Swansea Wilderness Study Area have been worked intermittently since the late 1800's. The mineral occurrences are of epithen:nal origin. The min~s are developed in replacement deposits in carbonate racks and in epithermal veins in low- a,id high-angle faults in and above the Buckskin-Rawhide detachment fault (Swansea, Planet,

Uranium and Vanadium
The Anderson uranium-vanadium mine in the Date Creek Basin, 30 mi east of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, is in fine-grained sedimentary and volcanic rocks assigned to the middle Tertiary Chapin Wash Formation (Sherborne and others, 1979; Otton, 1981; Spencer and Welty, 1985). These rocks are broadly correlative with the upper plate Tertiary volcanic and sedimentary rocks near ~ study area, though correlations between the two rock

C16 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona .

sections are uncertain (Spencer and Reynolds, 1989). The presence of pennissive rock units and anomalous concentrations of vanadium in heavy-mineral-concentrate samples indicate that these areas should be assigned a low resource potential with a certainty level of B (fig. 2).
Oil and gas
No resource potential exists for oil and gas in the Swansea Wilderness Study Area because of the lack of hydrocarbon-bearing rocks, because the generally thin sections of unmetamorphosed rock are structurally bounded at shallow depths and are underlain by mylonitic rocks that were metamorphosed at midcrustal depths, and because much of the exposed terrane is underlain at the surface by metamorphic rocks.
Sand and gravel
Quantities of sand and gravel are available in the Swansea Wilderness Study Area as unconsolidated to poorly consolidated alluvial deposits in washes and along the Bill Williams River. These deposits, however, contain no unique characteristic that make them more attractive than areas closer to population centers (Ryan, 1989).
REFERENCES CITED
Bancroft, Howland, 1911, Reconnaissance of the ore deposits in northern Yuma County, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin, 451, 130 p.
Beikman. H.M., Hinkle, M.E., Freiders, Twila, Marcus, S.M., and Edward, J.R., 1983, Mineral surveys by the Geological Survey and Bureau of Mines of Bureau of Land Management Wilderness Study Areas: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 901,28 p.
Brown, D.E., 1982, Biotic communities of the American Southwest-United States and Mexico, Desert Plants, v. 4, no. 1-4, 342p.
Bryant, Bruce, and Wooden, J.L., 1989, Lower plate rocks of the Buckskin Mountains, Arizona: A progress report, in Spencer, I.E., and Reynolds, S.J., eds., Geology of the Rawhide and Buckskin Mountains region, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, p. 47-50.
Cordell, Lindreth, Keller, G.R., and Hildenbrand, T.G., 1982, Bouguer gravity map of the Rio Grande rift, Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas: U.S. Geological Survey Geophysical Investigations Map GP-949, scale 1:1,000,000 (with text).
Cox, D.P., and Singer, D.A., eds., 1986, Mineral deposit models: U.S. Geological Society Bulletin 1693, 379 p.
Davis, G.A., 1988, Rapid upward transport of mid-crustal mylonitic gneisses in the footwall of a Miocene detachment fault, Whipple Mountains, southeastern California: Geologische Rundschau,v. 77,p. 191-209.

Davis, G.A., and Lister, G.S., 1988, Detachment faulting in continental extension; Perspectives from the southwestern U.S. Cordillera: Geological Society of America Memoir 218, p. 133-159.
Davis, G.A., Anderson, J.L., Frost, E.G., and Shackelford, T.J., 1980, Mylonitization and detachment faulting in the WhippleBuckskin-Rawhide Mountains terrane, southeastern California and western Arizona, in Crittenden M.D., Jr., Coney, P.J., and Davis, G.H., eds., Cordilleran metamorphic core complexes: Geological Society of America Memoir 153, p. 3577.
Davis, G.H., 1983, Shear-zone model for the origin of metamorphic core coinplexes: Geology, v. 11, p. 120-124.
Deer, W.A., Howie, R.A., and Zussman, I., 1962, Rock-Forming Minerals, Ortho- and ring-silicates, v. 1, John Wiley and sons, New York. 1124 p.
Eppinger, R.G., Adrian, B.M., Fey, D.L., O'Leary R.M., Motooka, J.M., Roushey, B.H., Erdman, J.A., Watterson, J.R., and Hassemer, J.R., 1990a, Paper version of analytical results, basic statistics, and sample locality map of stream-sediment, heavy-mineral-concentrate, rock, creosote-bush, palo verde, and Bacillus cereus samples from the Swansea, Planet Peak. Gibraltar Mountain, Cactus Plain, and East Cactus Plain Wilderness Study Areas, La Paz and Mohave Cmmties, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-227A, 95 p.
Eppinger, R.G., Adrian, B.M., Fey, D.L., O'Leary, R.M., Motooka, J.M., Roushey, B.H., Erdman, J.A., Watterson, J.R., and Hassemer, I.R., 1990b, Diskette version of analytical results and basic statistics for stream-sediment, heavy-mineral-concentrate, rock. creosote-bush, palo verde, and Bacillus cereus samples from the Swansea, Planet Peak, Gibraltar Mountain, Cactus Plain, and East Cactus Plain Wilderness Study Areas, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-227B, one 1.2Mb, 5.25-inch diskette.
GoudarZi, G.H., 1984, Guide to preparation of mineral survey reports on public lands: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-787, 51 p.
Harrer, C.M., 1964, Reconnaissance of iron resources in Arizona: U.S.Bureau of Mines Information Circular 8236, 204 p.
Howard, K.A., and John, B.E., 1987, Crustal extension along a rooted system of imbricate low-angle faults; Colorado River extensional corridor, California and Arizona, in Coward, M.P., Dewey, J.F., and Hancock, P.L., eds., Continental extensional tectonics: Geological Society of London Special Publication No. 28, p. 299-312.
Hunt, G.R., and Ashley, R.P., 1977, Spectra of altered rocks in the visible and near-infrared: Economic Geology, v. 74, p. 16131629.
Hunt, G.R., and Salisbury, J.W., 1971, Visible and near-infrared spectra of minerals and rocks: ll. Carbonates: Modem Geology, v. 2, p. 23-30.
Jones, E.L., Jr., and Ransome, F.L., 1920, Deposits of manganese ore in Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 710, p. 93184.
Keith, S.B., 1978, Index of mining prospects in Yuma County, Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology Bulletin 192, 185 p.
Keith, Stanley, Gest, D.E., and DeWitt, Ed, 1983a, Metallic mineral districts of Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

C17

Mineral Technology, Map 18, scale 1:100,00. Keith, Stanley, Gest, D.E., DeWitt, Edward, Woode Toll, Netta,
and Everson, B.A., 1983b, Metallic mineral districts and production in Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology Bulletin 194, 58 p. Kreidler, T.J., 1986, Mineral investigation of the Cactus Plains Wilderness Study Area, La Paz County, Arizona: U.S. Bureau of Mines Open File Report MLA 64--86, 11 p. Lasky, S.G., and Webber, B.N., 1949, Manganese resources of the Artillery Mountains region, Mohave Cmmty, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 961, 86 p. Lee, W.T., 1908, Geologic reconnaissance of part of western Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 352, pp. 14-15. Lehman, N.E., and Spencer, J.E., 1989, Mineralization in the central parts of the Planet mineral district, northwestern Buckskin Mountains, in Spencer, J.E., and Reynolds, S.J., eds., Geology and mineral resources of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, p. 215-222. Lehman, N.E., Spencer, J.E., and Welty, J.W., 1987, Middle Tertiary mineralization related to metamorphic core complexes and detaclunent faults in Arizona and California: Society of Mining Engineers Preprint 87-21, 9 p. Levinson, A.A., 1980, Introduction to Exploration Geochemistry, second edition: Applied Publishing Ltd., Wilmette, illinois, 924p. McKelvey, V.E., 1972, Mineral resource estimates and public policy: American Scientist, v. 60, p. 32-40. Osborne, G.M., 1981, The structural geology of the Squaw Peak area of the Buckskin Mountains, Ywna County, Arizona: Los Angeles, California, University of Southern California, M.S. thesis, 164 p. Otton, J.K., 1981, Geology and genesis of the Anderson mine, a carbonaceous lacustrine uraniwn deposit, western Arizona; a summary report: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-780,24 p. Raines, G.L., 1977, Digital color analysis of color ratio composite Landsat scenes: Proceedings, Eleventh International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, p. 1463-1472. Rehrig, W.A., and Reynolds, S.J., 1980, Geologic and geochronologic reconnaissance of a northwest-trending zone of metamorphic complexes in southern and western Arizona, in Crittenden M.D., Jr., Coney, P.J., and Davis, G.H., eds., Cordilleran metamorphic core complexes: Geological Society of America Memoir 153, p. 131-158. Reynolds, S.J., 1980, Geologic framework of west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Society Digest, v. 12, p. 1-16. Reynolds, S.J., and Spencer, J.E., 1989, Pre-Tertiary rocks and structures in the upper plate of the Buckskin detaclunent fault, west-central Arizona, in Spencer, I.E., and Reynolds, S.J., eds., Geology and mineral resources of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, p. 67-102. Ryan, G.S., 1989, Mineral investigation of a part of the Swansea
Wilderness Study Area (AZ-050-015A), La Paz and Mo-
have Counties, Arizona: U.S. Bureau of Mines Open-File Report MLA 12-89, 19 p. Ryder, R.T., 1983, Petroleum potential of wilderness lands in Arizona, in Petrolewn potential of wilderness lands in the west-

em United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 902 AP, p. C1-C22. Shackelford, T.J., 1976, Structural geology of the Rawhide Mountains, Mohave County, Arizona: Los Angeles, University of Southern California, Ph.D. thesis, 176 p. --1989, Structural geology of the Rawhide Mountains, Mohave County, Arizona, in Spencer, J.E., and Reynolds, S.J., eds., Geology and mineral resources of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, p. 15-46. Sherborne, J.E., Jr., Buckovic, W.A., DeWitt, E.B., Hellinger, T.S., and Pavlak, S.J., 1979, Major uranium discovery in volcaniclastic sediments, Basin and Range Province: American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 63, p. 621-646. Spencer, J.E., 1989, Compilation geologic map of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona, in Spencer, J.E., and Reynolds. S.J., eds., Geology and mineral resources of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, plate 3, scale 1:100,000. Spencer, I.E.• ·and Reynolds. S.J., 1986. Some aspects of the middle Tertiary tectonics of Arizona and southeastern California, in Beatty, Barbara, and Wilkinson, P.A.K., eds., Frontiers in geology and ore deposits of Arizona and the southwest: Tucson, Arizona Geological Society Digest, v. 16, p. 102-107. ---1987, Geologic map of the Swansea-Copper Penny area, central Buckskin Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral technology Open-File 87-2, scale 1:12,000. ---1989, Tertiary structure, stratigraphy, and tectonics of the Buckskin Mountains, in Spencer, J.E., and Reynolds, S.J., eds., Geology and mineral resources of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, p. 103-167. Spencer, J.E.• and Welty, J.W., 1985, Reconnaissance geology of mineralized areas in parts of the Buckskin, Rawhide, , McCracken, and northeast Harcuvar Mountains, western Arizona: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology Open-file 85-86. 31 p. - - - 1986, Possible controls of base- and precious-metal mineralization associated with Tertiary detaclunent faulting in the lower Colorado River trough, Arizona and California: Geology, v. 14, p. 195-198. --1989, Geology of mineral deposits in the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, in Spencer, J.E., and Reynolds, S.J., eds., Geology and mineral resources of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, p. 215-254. Spencer, J.E.• Duncan, J.T., and Burton, W.O., 1988, The Copperstone mine: Arizona's new gold producer: Arizona Bureau of Geology and Mineral Technology Fieldnotes, v. 18, no. 2, p. 1-3. Spencer, J.E., Grubensky, M.J., Duncan J.T., Shenk, J.D., Yamold, J.C., and Lombard, J.P., 1989, Geology and mineral deposits of the central Artillery Mountains, in Spencer, J.E., and Reynolds, S.J., eds., Geology and mineral resomces of the Buckskin and Rawhide Mountains, west-central Arizona: Arizona Geological Survey Bulletin 198, p. 168-183. Suneson, N.H.,1980, The origin of bimodal volcanism, west-cen-

C18 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

tral Arizona: Santa Barbara. Calif., University of California. Ph.D. thesis, 293 p. Suneson, N.H., and Lucchiua. lvo, 1979, K/Ar ages of Cenozoic volcanic rocks, west~entral Arizona: Isochron/West, no. 24, p. 25-29. Suneson, N.H., and Lucchiua. lvo, 1983, Origin of bimodal volcanism, southern Basin and Range province, west-central Arizona: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 94, p. 1005-1019. U.S. Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey, 1980, Principles of a resomce/reserve classification for minerals: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 831,5 p. U.S. Geological Survey, 1981, Aeromagnetic map of the Needles 1° x 2° quadrangle, California and Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-85, scale 1:250,000. Welty, J.W., Spencer, J.E., Allen, G.B., Reynolds, S.J., and Trapp, R.A., 1985, Geology and production of Middle Tertiary mineral districts in Arizona: Arizona Bmeau of Geology and Mineral Technology Open-File 85-1,88 p. Western Geophysical Company of America. Aero Service Division, 1979, Airborne gamma-ray spectrometer and magnetometer surveys of Las Vegas quadrangle (Arizona. California. Nevada), Williams quadrangle (Arizona), Prescott quadrangle (Arizona), and Kingman quadrangle (Arizona. California. Nevada), Final report: U.S. Department of Energy, Grand Junction Office [Report] GJBX 59-79, v. 1 and 2, scale 1:500,000.

Wilkins, Joe, Jr., and Heidrick. T.L.• 1982. Base and precious metal mineralization related to low-angle tectonic features in the Whipple Mountains, California. and Buckskin Mountains, Arizona. in Frost, E.G., and Martin, D.L., eds., MesozoicCenozoic tectonic evolution of the Colorado River region, California. Arizona. and Nevada: San Diego, California. Cordilleran Publishers, p. 182-203.
Wilkins, Joe, Jr., Beane, R.E., and Heidrick. T.L., 1986, Mineralization related to detachment faults: a model, in Beatty, Barbara. and Wilkinson, P.A.K., eds., Frontiers in geology and ore deposits of Arizona and the southwest: Tucson, Arizona Geological Society Digest, v. 16, p. 108-117.
Wilkinson, W.H., Wendt, C.J., and Dennis, M.D., 1988, Gold mineralization along the Riverside detachment fault, Riverside County, California. in Schafer, R.W., Cooper, J.J., Vikre, P.O., eds., Bulk mineable precious metal deposits of the western United States: Reno, Nevada. Geological Society of Nevada. p. 487-503.
Wodzicki, Antoni, Krason, Jan, and Cruver, S.K., 1982. Geology, energy, and mineral resources assessmentof the Bill Williams area. Arizona: Denver, Colorado, Geoexplorers International, Inc.,130p.
Woodward, R.J., 1981, The structural geology of the Swansea area. east~entral Buckskin Mountains, Yuma County, Arizona: Los Angeles, Calif., University of Southern California. M.S. thesis, 106 p.
•

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona

C19

APPENDIXES

DEFINITION OF LEVELS OF. MINERAL RESOURCE POTENTIAL AND CERTAINTY OF ASSESSMENT
LEVELS OF RESOURCE POTENTIAL
H HIGH mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics indicate a geologic environment favorable for resource occurrence, where interpretations of data indicate a high degree of likelihood for resource accumulation, where data support mineral-deposit models indicating presence of resources, and where evidence indicates that mineral concentration has taken place. Assignment of high resource potential to an area requires some positive knowledge that mineral-forming processes have been active. in at least part of the area.
M MODERATE mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics indicate a geologic environment favorable for resource occurrence, where interpretations of data indicate reasonable likelihood for resource accumulation, and (or) where an application of mineral-deposit models indicates favorable ground for the specified type(s) of deposits.
L LOW mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics define a geologic environment in which the existence of resources is permissive. This broad category embraces areas with dispersed but insignificantly mineralized rock, as well as areas with little or no indication of having been mineralized.
N NO mineral resource potential is a category reserved for a specific type of resource in a well-defined area. U UNKNOWN mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where information is inadequate to assign a low,
moderate, or high level of resource potential.
LEVELS OF CERTAINTY
A Available information is not adequate for determination of the level of mineral resource potential. B Available information only suggests the level of mineral resource potential. C Available information gives a good indication of the level of mineral resource potential. D Available information clearly defines the level of mineral resource potential.

A U/A

B H/B
HIGH POTENTIAL

c
H/C
HIGH POTENTIAL

D H/D
HIGH POTENTIAL

<...J iz=

tv1/B tvVC tvVD

0LU MODERATE POTENTIAL MODERATE POTENTIAL MODERATE POTENTIAL
0.. UNKNOWN POTENTIAL

ucuLU UB

UD

~

:::)

0

LOW POTENTIAL

LOW POTENTIAL

LOW POTENTIAL

V)

LU ~

u.
0

N/D

...J
>LU NO POTENTIAL
LU ...J

Abstracted with minor modifications from:

LEVEL OF CERTAINTY

Taylor, R.B., and Steven, T.A., 1983, Definition of mineral resource potential: Economic Geology, v. 78, no. 6, p. 1268-1270. Taylor, R.B., Stoneman, R.J., and Marsh, S.P., 1984, An assessment of the mineral resource potential of the San Isabel National Forest, south-central Colorado: U.S.
Geological Survey Bulletin 1638, p. 40-42. Goudarzi, G.H., compiler, 1984, Guide to preparation of mineral survey reports on public lands: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-0787, p. 7, 8.

C22 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

RESOURCE/RESERVE CLASSIFICATION

IDENTIFIED RESOURCES

Demonstrated
Measured Indicated

Inferred

UNDISCOVERED RESOURCES Probability Range

Hypothetical

Speculative

ECONOMIC
MARGINALLY ECONOMIC
SUBECONOMIC

I
Reserves

Inferred Reserves

I
----~----

r----------

-

Marginal Reserves

Inferred Marginal Reserves

·

I
----~----

f----------

f-

Demonstrated

Inferred

Subeconomic

Subeconomic

Resources
I

Resources

I
-,I-
I
-~-
I I

Major elements of mineral resource classification, excluding reserve base and inferred reserve base. Modified from McKelvey, V.E., 1972, Mineral resource estimates and public policy: American Scientist, v. 60, p. 32-40; and U.S. Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey, 1980, Principles of a resource/reserve classification for minerals: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 831, p. 5.

Mineral Resources of the Swansea Wilderness Study Area, La Paz and Mohave Counties, Arizona C23

GEOLOGIC TIME CHART
Terms and boundary ages used by the U.S. Geological Survey in this report

EON

AGE ESTIMATES OF

ERA

PERIOD

EPOCH

BOUNDARIES IN

MILLION YEARS (Ma)

Cenozoic

Quaternary

Tertiary

Neogene Sub period
Paleogene Subperiod

Holocene Pleistocene
Pliocene Miocene Oligocene Eocene Paleocene

0.010 1.7 5 24 38 55 66

Cretaceous

late Early

-

Mesozoic

jurassic

late Middle
Early

Triassic

late Middle
Early

Phanerozoic

Paleozoic

Permian
Pennsylvanian Carboniferous
Periods Mississippian
Devonian
Silurian

late Early
late Middle
Early
late Early
late Middle
Early
late Middle
Early

Ordovician

late Middle
Early

Cambrian

late Middle
Early

Late Proterozoic

Proterozoic

Middle Proterozoic

Early Proterozoic

late Archean

Archean

Middle Archean

Early Archean

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - (3 800?)- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - pre-Archean2

96 138
205
-240 290
-330 360
410
435
500
1-570 900
1600 2500 3000 3400

4550

1Rocks older than 570 Ma also called Precambrian, a time term without specific rank. 21nformal time term without specific rank.

C24 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Havasu Region, Arizona

SELECTED SERIES OF U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY PUBLICATIONS

Periodicals
Earthquakes & Volcanoes (issued bimonthly). Preliminary Determination of Epicenters (issued monthly).
Technical Books and Reports
Professional Papers are mainly comprehensive scientific reports of wide and lasting interest and importance to professional scientists and engineers. Included are reports on the results of resource studies. and of topographic, hydrologic, and geologic investigations. They also mcl~de collections ofrelated papers addressing different aspects of a single scientific topic.
Bulletins contain significant data and interpretations that are of lasting scientific interest but are generally more limited in scope or geographic coverage than Professional Papers. They include the results ofresource studies and of geologic and topographic investigations; as well as collections of short papers related to a specific topic.
Water-Supply Papers are comprehensive reports that present significant interpretive results of hydrologic investigations of wide interest to professional geologists, hydrologists, and engineers. The series covers investigations in all phases of hydrology, including hydrogeology, availability of water, quality of water, and use of water.
Clr'culars present administrative information or important scientific information of wide popular interest in a format designed for distribution at no cost to the public. Information is usually of short-term interest.
Water-Resources Investigations Reports are papers of an interpretive nature made available to the public outside the formal USGS publications series. Copies are reproduced on request unlike formal USGS publications, and they are also available for public inspection at depositories indicated in USGS catalogs.
Open-File Reports include unpublished manuscript reports, maps, and other material that are made available for public consultation at depositories. They are a nonpermanent form of publication that may be cited in other publications as sources of information.
Maps
Geologic Quadrangle Maps are multicolor geologic maps on
topographic bases in 7 1n.- or 15-minute quadrangle formats (scales main-
ly 1:24,000 or 1:62.500) showing bedrock. surficial, or engineering geology. Maps generally include brief texts; some maps include structure and columnar sections only.
Geophysical Investigations Maps are on topographic or planimetric bases at various scales; they show results of surveys using geophysical techniques, such as gravity, magnetic, seismic, or radioactivity, which reflect subsurface structures that are ofeconomic or geologic significance. Many maps include correlations with the geology.
Miscellaneous Investigations Series Maps are on planimetric or topographic bases of regular and irregular areas at various scales; they present a wide variety of format and subject matter. The series also includes 7 1/2-minute quadrangle photogeologic maps on planimetric bases which show geology as interpreted from aerial photographs. Series also includes maps of Mars and the Moon.

Coal Investigations Maps are geologic maps on topographic or planimetric bases at various scales showing bedrock or surficial geology, stratigraphy, and structural relations in certain coal-resource areas.
011 and Gas Investigations Charts show stratigraphic information for certain oil and gas fields and other areas having petroleum potential.
Miscellaneous Field Studies Maps are multicolor or black-andwhite maps on topographic or planimetric bases on quadrangle or irregular areas at various scales. Pre-1971 maps show bedrock geology in relation to specific mining or mineral-deposit problems; post-1971 maps are primarily black-and-white maps on various subjects such as environmental studies or wilderness mineral investigations.
Hydrologic Investigations Atlases are multicolored or black-andwhite maps on topographic or planimetri(.. bases presenting a wide range ofgeohydrologic data ofboth regular and irregular areas; principal scale is 1:24,000 and regional studies are at 1:250,000 scale or smaller.
Catalogs
Permanent catalogs, as well as some others, giving comprehensive listings of U.S. Geological Survey publications are available under the conditions indicated below from the U.S. Geological Survey, Books and Open-File Reports Section, Federal Center, Box 25425, Denver, CO 80225. (See latest Price and Availability List.)
"Publications of the Geological Survey, 1879-1961" may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form and as a set of microfiche.
"Publications of the Geological Survey, 1962-1970" may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form and as a set of microfiche.
"Publications of the U.S. Geological Survey, 1971- 1981" may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form (two volumes, publications listing and index) and as a set of microfiche.
Supplements for 1982,1983, 1984, 1985,1986, and for subsequent years since the last permanent catalog may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form.
State catalogs, "List of U.S. Geological Survey Geologic and Water-Supply Reports and Maps For (State)," may bepur'chased by mail and over the counter in paperback booklet form only.
"Price and Avallablllty List of U.S. Geological Survey Publications," issued annually, is available free of charge in paperback booklet form only.
Selectedcoplesofamonthlycatalog "New Publications of the U.S. Geological Survey" available free of charge by mail or may be obtained over the counter in paperback booklet form only. Those wishing a free subscription to the monthly catalog "New Publications of the U~S. Geological Survey" should write to the U.S. Geological Survey, 582 National Center, Reston, VA 22092.
Note.--Prices of Government publications listed in older catalogs, announcements, and publications may be incorrect. Therefore, the prices charged may differ from the prices in catalogs, announcements, and publications.

osaayI Otners-MJN tKAL RtSUURCt!:>, SyY_Af'!~tA WILUl:KNt:_::>~ ::>I UUT AKtA, AKILUNA-U.=>.,:__~~OJOglc:a! ~E_~ey _1:5Uir~~ U4-"-::

