GEOLOGICAL SURVEY CIRCULAR 51

January 1951

CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS IN GRAHAM COUNTY, KANSAS
By
Frank E. Byrne, Vincent B. Coombs, and Claude W. Matthews
PREPARED IN COOPERATION WITH THE STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION OF KANSAS
R. C. Keeling, State Highway Engineer S. E. Horner, Chief Geologist

Prepared as Part of a Program of the Department of the Interior for Development of the Missouri River Basin

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR Oscar L. Chapman, Secretary
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY W. E. Wrather, Director
WASHINGTON, D. C. Free on application to the Geological Survey, Washington 25, D. C.

CONTENTS

Page

Introduction............................ 1

Purpose of the investigation.......... 1

Area covered by the investigation..... 1

Geography of the area............... 1

Topography....................... .1

Drainage......................... 1

Climate................... t ...... 1

Transportation routes.............. 3

Investigation procedure.............. 3

Acknowledgments..................... 3

Characteristics of the outcropping

stratigraphic units..................... 3

General.

Smoky Hill chalk member of the

Niobrara formation...........

6

Areal distribution..........

6

General description.........

6

Representative measured

section...................

6

Thickness....................... 6,7

Construction materials........... 7

Pierre shale............;............. 7

Areal distribution distribution..... 7

General description.............. 7

Representative measured

sections....................... 7

Thickness....................... 7

Construction materials........... 7,8

Ogallala formation..................... 8

Areal distribution...'............. 8

General description.............. 8

Representative measured

sections....................... 8

Thickness....... r................ 8

Construction materials........... 9

Sariborn formation..................... 9

Areal distribution............... 9

General description.............. 9

Representative measured

section........................ 9, ID

Thickness...................... 10

Construction materials.......... 10

Terrace deposits...................... 10

Areal distribution............... 10

General description............. 10

Representative measured

sections...................... 10

Thickness...................... 10

Construction materials.......... 10

Dune sand............................ 10

Areal distribution............... 10

General description............. 10

Representative measured

section....................... 11

Thickness...................... 11

Construction materials.......... 11

Alluvium............................. 11

Areal distribution............... 11

General description.............. 11

Representative measured

section........................ 11

Thickness........................ 11

Construction materials........... 11

Inventory of construction materials...... 11 General......................... 11 Aggregate for concrete............ 11 Engineering and geologic characteristics............... 11 Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics....... 12 Ogallala formation............ 12 Sanborn formation............ 12 Terrace deposits............~. 12 Dune sand................... 12 Alluvium.................... 12
Road metal.........:.................. 12 Engineering and geologic characteristics. 4 ............... 12 Sources of aggregate for concrete. 12 Crushed rock.................... 12
Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics.............. 13 Sources of aggregate for concrete., 13 Crushed rock.................... 13 Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation. ..................... 13 Ogallala formation............. 13
Mineral filler......................... 13 Engineering and geologic characteristics.............. 13 Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics..... 13 Sanborn formation........... 13 Terrace deposits............ 13
Volcanic ash.......................... 13 Engineering and geologic characteristics................ 13 Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics....... 14
Riprap............................... 14 Engineering and geologic characteristics.................. 14 Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics......... 14 Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation...... 14 Ogallala formation.............. 14
Structural stone................... 14 Engineering and geologic
characteristics................ 14 Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics....... 14
Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation.... 14,15
Ogallala formation............. 15 Calcareous binder..................... 15
Engineering and geologic characteristics............... 15
Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics...... 15 Smoky Hill chalk member
of the Niobrara formation. ........................ 15 Ogallala formation............. 15

ILLUSTRATIONS

Page

Plate 1. Map showing construction materials and geology of Graham County, Kans................ In pocket

Figure 1. Index map of Kansas showing areas covered by this report and by other construc-

tion-materials investigations....................................................... 1

2. Chart showing temperature ranges at Hill City, Kans................................... 2

3. Chart showing precipitation ranges at Hill City, Kans.................................. 2

4. Outcropping stratigraphic units in Graham County, Kans., and their con-

struction materials................................................................ 4

5. Geologic cross section of the South Fork Solomon River...............................

5

TABLE

Table 1. Summary of materials tests......................................................... In pocket

ii

CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS IN GRAHAM COUNTY, KANSAS
By
Frank E. Byrne, Vincent B. Coomb., Mftdftude W. Matthews

INTRODUCTION
)se of the investigation
The State Highway Commission of Kansas and the United States Geological Survey are cooperating in a State-wide inventory of construction materials. A field party composed of personnel from the two cooperating agencies investigated,sources of engineering construction materials in Graham County, Kans., in the summer of 1947. This report of the Graham County investigation is a part of the general inventory and a contribution to the geologic-mapping and mineralresource investigations being made in connection with the studies of the Missouri River Basin. \l
The primary objective of the investigation was that of accumulating all field and laboratory data pertaining to the geologic materials in Graham. County that would be of use in the construction of dams, irrigation canals, highways, airports, and other engineering structures. Additional geologic data are included in this report, but only to the extent of providing information useful in the development of the prospects reported in the inventory, or for the location of other materials required for future engineering needs.
Area covered by the investigation
Graham County is in the second tier of Kansas counties south of the Nebraska border and in the fourth tier east of Colorado. (See fig. 1.) It comprises 25 townships and covers an area of about 900 square miles. The county is bounded by parallels 39° 08' and 39°34' north latitude and meridians 99°36'30" and
Missouri River Basin, conservation, control, and use of water resources: 78th Cong., 2d sess., S. doc. 191, 1944.

100° 10' west longitude. It is bounded op the north by Norton County, on the east by Rooks County, on the south by Trego County, and on the west by Sheridan County.
Geography of the area
Topography. Graham County is in the Plains Border section of the Great Plains physiographic province. 2/ The surface drainage is to the east, and for that reason the eastern part of the county is somewhat more dissected than the western part. The interstream areas are usually flat or gently rounded; they are sharp-crested only along the valleys of the major streams. The valleys of the principal streams and their larger tributaries are cut 175 feet below the . general upland level. The upland surface is highest along the western border of the county, in places rising slightly more than 2,500 feet above sea level. The lowest point in the county, at an altitude of about 1, 980 feet, is in the valley of the South Fork Solomon River at the eastern boundary of the county.
Drainage. The principal streams in Graham . County are the South Fork Solomon River, the North Fork Saline River, and Bow Creek. (See pi, 1.) The southward-flowing-tributaries to these strums are more numerous but appreciably shorter than the northward-flowing tributaries.
Climate. - -Graham County is in an area of. continental-type climate in which the summers are relatively long and hot and the winters short and fairly cold. The mean annual temperature is 53. 9° F., and the mean daily temperature ranges from a low of
2Frye, J. C., The High Plains surface in Kansas: Kansas Acad. Sci. Trans., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 81-82, June 1946.

Report published
Figure I. Index mop of Kansas Jtfiowma greos covered by this report and by other cofrttnictiart material* investigations

28. 5° F. in January to a high of 79° F. in July. There are 40 cloudy days a year, 100 partly cloudy days, and 225 clear days. The ground is snow-covered 31 days of the year. The normal annual precipitation is 20. 55 inches. The average date of the first killing frost in the fall is October 12, and that of the last killing frost in the spring is April 30. 3_/
Figure 2, a chart showing temperature ranges at Hill City, Kans. , was compiled from Climatological Data 4/ for the years 1937 to 1946, inclusive, to provide basic data on temperature in relation to engineering construction. The chart indicates, for the 10-year period, the number of days each month in which the maximum daily temperature fell within certain designated ranges arbitrarily based on temperatures important in various phases of engineering construction.

Days in which the maximum temperature does not exceed 32° F. occur only from November to March, inclusive) with the maximum incidence of 7. 4 days in January. July is the warmest month of the year, with an average of 24. 5 days having maximum temperatures above 90° F. The chart also shows the average difference between the daily maximum and minimum temperatures for each month. The greatest difference in daily temperatures, 31. 11°F. , is in October; and the least difference, 25. 61° F. , is in January.
Inasmuch as precipitation also conditions the number of working days in engineering construction, figure 3, a chart showing precipitation ranges at Hill City, Kans. , is"presented to show the effect of this climatic factor. The ranges in precipitation were selected arbitrarily.

Average difference between
26°F 26°F 28°F 26°F 27°F 27°F 30°^
and minimum temperatures.

EXPLANATION
I Days in which maximum temperature was more than 90* R I (no concrete construction)
Days in which maximum temperature was between 6I°"90° F. ' (no Interference with any type of construction}
I3 Days in which maximum temperature was between 4I°-60° F. (no interference with, concrete construction; no bituminous surfacing* fold)
* 3 Days in which maximum temperature was between 32*-40°F.
(concrete construction requires protection)
Days in which maximum tsmperoture was less than 32° F. * (ho concrete construction)

Boto-fer froth ehorts
compiled from Climatological Data
Kansas Section for years 1937 to
1946, inclusive.
Issued by
Weather Bureau
United States Department of Commercs

EXPLANATION - Days in which precipitation I was more than I inch
(no construction activity)
Days in which precipitation I was between O.ll and I inch
(no bituminous surfacing* laid)
I Days in which precipitation was between a trace and D.I inch (no interference with construction)
, Days In which there was 3 no precipitation * (no interference with construction)

Figure 2._Chart showing temperature ranges at Hill City, Kansas! Figure 3._Chort showing precipitation ranges at Hill City, Kansas.

3Flora, S. D., The climate of Kansas: Kansas State Board of
Agriculture,Rept., vol. 67, no. 285, 320 pp., 1948. 4U. S. Dept. Commerce, Weather Bur. Climatological Data
{Kansas section)

As based on a 10-year average, 5/ there are 21.1 days in June, for example, in which no measurable precipitation fell; 3. 2 days in which the precipitation ranged from a trace to 0.1 inch; 4. 4 days in which 0. 11 to 1 inch of rain fell; and 1. 3 days in which the precipitation was more than 1 inch. Continuing rains fall, for theynaost part, in the late spring and early fall, and other rainfall is generally in the form of showers of short duration.

executive director, made available its information on quartzites in Graham and surrounding counties.
This report, in manuscript form, was reviewed critically byS. E. Horner, chief geologist of the State Highway Commission and the United States Geological Survey.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE OUTCROPPING

Transportation routes. Graham County is served by one railroad, a branch line of the Union Pacific; two transcontinental highways (U. S. 24 and U. S. 283); and one highway (18). The Federal highways are of the black-top type of construction, and the State highway is a metaled, all-weather road. County and township roads, for the most part, follow section lines. Some of them are metaled with materials available locally, whereas others are maintained as earth roads. The locations of the roads and the railroad are shown on plate 1.

STRATIGRAPHIC UNITS
General
This discussion of the geologic formations that crop out in Graham County emphasizes the area! distribution, the general characteristics, and the thickness of each stratigraphic unit. This part of the report presents the geological information required for the location and the effective development of the construction materials.

Investigation procedure
This report is based on field work of the reconnaissance type. The original base map was compiled at a scale of 1 inch equals 2 miles by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture from large-scale aerial photographs. This base map was enlarged photographically to a Scale of 1 inch equals 1'mile. The area! distribution of the stratigraphic units that crop out in Graham County was then mapped in the field on the enlarged base map. The mapped units are those recognized by the United States Geological Survey 6/ and the Kansas Geological Survey. 7/ The principal emphasis of this report is on construction materials. Geologic problems not critically" related to construction materials, therefore, are considered to be of secondary importance.
An effort was made to accumulate all existing data pertaining to construction materials in the county these are presented in table 1, a summary of material tests.
A cknowledgments
Generous assistance in the compilation of construction-materials data by the following is appreciated: R. D. Finney, engineer of materials, and his associates in the State Highway Commission at Topeka and Manhattan Kans.; and the district office of the Corps of Engineers, United States Army, at Kansas City, Mo. The State Geological Survey at Lawrence, Kans., J. C. Frye,
5Idem. ^ilmorth, M. G., Lexicon of geologic names of the United States: U. S. Geol. Survey Bull. 896, pts. 1 and 2, 2,396 pp., 1938. ?Moore, R. C., Frye, J. C-, and Jewett, J. M., Tabular description of outcropping rocks to Kansas: Kansas Geol. Survey Bull. 52, pt 4,
212 pp., 1944.

A summary of the data, for each mapped unit is presented in figure 4, and the relations of the stratigraphic units to one another are illustrated on figure 5, a geologic cross section of the South Fork Solomon River Valley.
The area! distribution of the local stratigraphic units is shown on plate 1, a map showing construction materials and geology of Graham County, Kans. Each unit is indicated by an identifying symbol, and its outcrop areas are shown by a distinctive pattern.
The locations of pits and quarries also are shown on plate 1. The symbols indicate whether the pit or quarry is or has been operated or is prospect, the type of construction material available at each site, and the quantity of the material (in units of 10,000 cubic yards) that can be removed under no more than moderate overburden (unconsolidated sediments less than 6 feet thick). Most of these sources are listed in table 1. Materials represented on the map by inclined letters have not been tested and are not listed in table 1. All materials sources listed in table 1 are numbered within each materials classification according to,the following plan: The numbering starts in the northeastermost township and continues along the same tier to the western boundary of the county; it is continued in the next tier south, starting again with the township in the easternmost range and proceeding to the west boundary of the county, and so on. Withina township the sources are numbered in the same sequence as are the sections of the township.

3) tcO 3

O ipfiil, f
o

o

oo
I
(O
en

oo
8 co^

Outcrop thickness
(feet)

tOo»'

Cretaceous
Upper Cretaceous

Tertiary Pliocene

Quaternary

System

Pleistocene and Recent Series

3
TJ

Mobrara formation

q

I

C
2 5? 5'

S> o o 3
O O
3

o
i?
o ex

O O <0
I Mfi
aI
z5/r

Q2. 32.3 1*0 a =§;*' §. s?

"n
(cO
V"
C7> g 5" ,0 0 3- 5 0
3- s S> 8 l»
o^ o 5-
s3 .0;a3 CD -* CO 0 3" CD CO CD 0 co r\3 CO
Q3 ^ 3 CL -n Q. c?
fv ^*^ CO
HH 2. tDOD § j» P 0

5. °*
I 5 fi S 5"2. 3^£ -. I 2
1o "go g ?3
S 3|

a -

1 gr ,? ^
v

.

«S9. o o 3 ;? -« « |° 1 5
T

w o 3-

S1
111

1 J>l

1

° o £,

= £

««3»

Wo. 9«
»

Hs." 0°
c~

3S 3

°. 2.

'

0

1 sQ
°

S

2

g»w

m

?/ 1j 1

S. § ! 1 ( §

o §

S A. °_L v

a «r

o o* »

3o &

33 33 33 OJ OJ -% «r -?- «.
o
3 (O
CO
s

3^ Scl <«
§a
W 3"

O CO
to
3

Altitude, in feet above ossumed datum
Valley of the "South Fork Solomon River

Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation
Area! distribution. The Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation of Upper Cretaceous age is the oldest stratigraphic unit cropping out in Graham County. (See pi. 1 and fig. 4.) The lower member of the Niobrara formation, the Fort Hays limestone, underlies the Smoky Hill chalk member throughout the area of the county but is not exposed at the surface. The Smoky Hill chalk crops out principally along the valley walls of the South Fork Solomon River, the North Fork Saline River, and their tributaries. The member is covered by younger stratigraphic units in the divide areas of the county. No outcrops of the Smoky Hill chalk were found in the northwest part of the county, although it probably is present in the valley of Bow Creek beneath a thin cover of Quaternary terrace deposits. The chalk is overlain by the Pierre shale but is separated from all younger stratigraphic units by a pronounced intervening erosional break (an unconformity). (See fig. 5.)
General description. -- The Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation consists of thick beds of chalky shale interbedded with relatively thin beds of chalky limestone and very thin layers of bentonite. The member is blue gray and light gray
in the eastern part of the county but is orange gray in the western part. Along the western border of the county it is bright yellow.
The thin layers of bentonite, which average only 0. 1 foot in thickness, appear to be persistent over considerable distances. The bentonites are white on unweathered surfaces but weather to yellow brown.
The beds of chalky limestone interbedded with the chalky shales are of the same color as the shale zones in which they occur. The limestones are soft, massive, and generally less .than a foot thick.
.In the vicinity both of Penokee and of Morland the uppermost chalk beds in the Smoky Hill member have been silicified through the action of percolating subsurface waters. The silicified beds are olive green and are composed of dense, hard, brittle opaline material. A typical exposure of the silicified chalk occurs in a road ditch along U. S. 24 in the NE-J-NEl sec. 15, T. 8.S., R. 24 W. The quartzite beds in the Ogallala formation are quite numerous in this this area (see pp. 7 and 8), and ground waters heavily charged with dissolved silica-probably replaced the calcium carbonate of the Smoky Hill chalk with silica. Frye and Swineford 8/ suggest that the silica may have been dissolved in a stratigraphically higher beds of volcanic ash.
Fossil shells of invertebrates and fragments of the fossilized skeletons of vertebrates have been reported from the Smoky Hill chalk. The numerous fossil shells are those of clams and oysters.
^rye, J. C., and Swineford, Ada, Silicified rock in the Ogallala formation: Kansas Geol. Survey Bull. 64, pt. 2, p. 57, 1946.

The Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara and the overlying Pierre shale dip generally at a low angle toward the northwest, and the older Cretaceous formations in the subsurface of Graham County probably dip in the same direction. Local, minor variations in the secondary structure of the Smoky Hill chalk were noted but are not mapped on plate 1 because they do not affect the availability of construction materials. There is a high-angle reverse fault exposed in the west valley wall of a small stream in the SE^SE? sec. 29, T. 8 S., R. 25 W. The fault plane dips toward the south at an angle of about 75° from the horizontal, and the "south block is upthrown about 10 feet.
Beds of the Smoky Hill chalk member in the SWiSEi sec. 11, T. 8 S. , R. 25 W. , dip about 20° E. , whereas a mile east, in the SWiSEi sec. 12, T. 8 S., R. 25 W., the dip is about 15° W., an angle appreciably greater than the regional dip. A small fault was noted in the cut bank in which the representative measured section of the Smoky Hill chalk is displayed.
Representative measured section. The following section of the Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation was measured in the NWiSWi sec. 15, T. 10 S., R. 22 W. , in a cut bank of a tributary to the North Fork Saline River:
Feet Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara
formation:. Chalk; light gray, weathers buff. Fossiliferous........................ 0. 2 Shale, chalky; light gray, weathers buff; limonite-stained. Fossiliferous........................ 2.4 Chalk, soft, massive; bluish gray, weathers light gray. Fossiliferous...... 1. 0 Shale, chalky; stains and stringers of limonite; light gray, weathers buff. Fossiliferous................... 1.1 Chalk, soft; bluish gray, weathers light gray............................ .1 Shale, chalky; dark brown, weathers blue gray. Fossiliferous.............. 1.0 Chalk, soft; bluish gray, weathers light gray............................. 2 Shale, chalky, limonite-stained; bluish gray, weathers li'ght gray. Fossiliferous......................... 3.0 Chalk; bluish gray, weathers light gray................................. .1 Shale, chalky; 0. 5- to 5-inch bentonitic concretions scattered throughout; bluish gray, weathers light gray. Fossiliferous... 32.0
Base covered....................... 41.1
Thickness. Individual outcrops of the Smoky Hill chalk member are relatively thin, the probable maximum thickness being about 50 feet and the average

thickness about 15 feet. Outcrops generally are appreciably thicker in the eastern part of the county than they are in the western part. Estimates based on the width of outcrop and the regional dip of this member toward the west and northwest place its total thickness in Graham County at about 300 feet.
Construction materials.
Road metal. Structural stone. Riprap. Calcareous binder.
Pierre shale
Areal distribution. Four outcrops of the Pierre shale of Upper Cretaceous age were found by the field party in Graham County. (See pi. 1 and fig. 4.) The largest of these is in sees. 28, 29, and 32, T. 83., R. 25 W. , where thp formation is exposed in the valley wall of a northward-flowing tributary of the South Fork Solomon River. A second outcrop was examined in the NEiSEi sec. 15, T. 8 S., R. 25 W., in a cut bank along the Solomon River. There is a small outcrop of the Pierre shale in the SEiSWi sec. 18, T. 9 S., .R. 23 W., in the valley of a small northwardflowing tributary of the South Fork Solomon River. The fourth outcrop was found in the SEiNWi sec. 9, T. 83., R. 25 W., in a cut bank just above the water level of Antelope Lake.
The Pierre shale is the youngest sedimentary rock of marine origin in Graham County. It overlies the Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation but is separated from all younger stratigraphic units by a pronounced erosional break. Undoubtedly the Pierre shale is extensive in the interstream areas of Graham County but is concealed by the younger Ogallala and Sariborn formations.
General description. Only the basal part of the Pierre shale crops out in the county. The shale generally is very thin bedded, is composed predominantly of clay- size particles, is noncalcareous, and has a soapy feel. Most of the shale zones are blue gray or blue black, but thin beds of white or brown bentonite are interbedded with the clay shales. The bentonitic zones increase in thickness in the upper part of the Pierre shale in Graham County, the maximum thickness observed being about 6 feet (in the SEiSWi sec. 18, T. 93., R. 23 W.). The bentonite is white on fresh surfaces but weathers brown. Small crystals of a variety of gypsum (selenite) occur locally in some zones of the clay shales. Limonite also is present in the shale zones.
Representative measured sections.
(1) The following section of the Pierre shale is exposed in a cut bank at a tributary to the South Fork

Solomon River in the SWfNEi sec. 32, T. 8 S., R. 25 W.:

Feet
Sariborn formation: Silt and sand........... 5.9
Pierre shale: Shale, bentonitic; buff with irregular gray stringers through-
out; weathers yellow.................. 7. 0 Bentonite, white..................... .1 Shale, bentonitic, yellow brown....... .3 Bentonite, white..................... .2 Shale, bentonitic, fairly compact; buff, weathers yellow............... 3. 5 Bentonite; buff with white string-
ers in upper and lower parts......... .2
Shale, bentonitic, quite compact; buff, weathers yellow............... 1. 5 Bentonite, brown.................... .3
Shale, clay, noncalcareous; black, weathers light blue gray............. 4.0

Base covered.

17.1

(2) Another exposure of the Pierre shale was measured in a cut bank in the NE^SWi sec. 15, T. 8 S., R. 25 W., as follows:

Terrace deposits: Silt, sand, and gravel. .................
Pierre shale: Shale, very thin bedded; dark brown,
weathers light brown..............
Shale; some sandy zones and small selenite crystals; very thin bedded; black, weathers dark gray......... Bentonite; yellow brown, weathers grayish white..................... Shale, noncalcareous, very thin bedded; weathers light gray........ Shale, very thin bedded; black, weathers light gray; limonitestained.......................... Shale, very thin bedded; black, weathers light gray...............

.5
3.0 .1
e;o
3.5 5.0

Base covered.

18.1

Thickness. The total thickness of the Pierre shale in Graham County may be more than 150 feet,
but the greatest thickness of any of the outcrops observed is about 18 feet. The formation undoubtedly
is thickest in the interstream areas, especially those along the western border of the county.

Construction materials. No materials of general use in engineering construction are found in the part of the Pierre shale that crops out in Graham County.
The bentonitic beds in the formation might be used in sealing earthen structures against water percolation,

but tests made by the State Geological Survey of Kansas 9/ indicate that the bentonites of Kansas do not sweff as much -when water-saturated (3 times the original volume) as do bentonites from Wyoming (15 times the original volume).
Ogallala formation
Area! distribution. The Ogallala formation of Pliocene age crops out in all parts of Graham County. (See pi. 1 and fig. 4.). The outcrops generally are restricted to the valleys of tributary streams and the valley walls of the major streams. (See fig. 5.) In some places the Sanborn formation, which overlies and thus conceals the Cgallala, has been eroded completely and the Cgallala formation has been uncovered extensively, as in the outcrpp area a short distance south of Hill City.
General description. The Ogallala formation includes interbedded lenses of silt, clay, and crossbedded sands and gravels that indicate the streamdeposited origin of much of the-formation. The lenses vary in both thickness and areal extent. The bulk of the material composing the Ogallala was eroded in the Rocky Mountain area by streams that transported the material toward the east and deposited it as a sedimentary layer over the High Plains. The Ogallala sediments constitute an enormously extensive piedmont alluvial plain formed on the east flank of the Rocky Mountains during the Tertiary period. Probably some lake-deposited (lacustrine) beds are included in the formation.
The sand and gravel lenses are composed principally of fragments of quartz, granite, and feldspar' and ofteii contain clay balls 3 or 4 inches in diameter. The coarsest gravel particles are about 1. 5 inches in average diameter. The sand and gravel particles are subrounded to rounded in shape, many of them coated with a film of calcium carbonate. The silt and clay particles are subangular to angular in shape and are predominantly "quartz and kaolinite.
"Lenticular beds of quartzite are quite numerous in the central part of Graham County and usually occur in the lower part of the Ogallala formation. Some of them were traced over distances of more than a mile, but most of them are quite local, the average extent being about 0. 25 mile in any one direction. The average thickness of the quartzite is 3 to 4 feet, but some of it is as much as 12 feet thick. The ledges are far harder than the other materials composing the Ogallala formation and are exposed at the surface as very conspicuous hillside ledges. The quartzite usually is green, but some beds are tan and a few are chocolate brown. The beds consist of cross-bedded sand or gravelly sand in which the constituent particles are usually very firmly cemented by silica deposited in the original pore spaces by percolating subsurface waters.
Mortar beds constitute another rock material characteristic of the Ogallala formation. A mortar bed is a lens of lime-cemented sand or gravel, or both, and is generally less hard than the silicacemented quartzites, although mortar beds usually
QJewett, J. M., and Schoewe, W. H., Kansas mineral resources for wartime industries: Kansas Geol. Survey Bull. 41, pt. 3, p. 124 1942.

form conspicuous hillside ledges. The ledges "generally are light gray and weather to irregular
surfaces. Their thickness ranges from 1 foot to about 5 feet.

Local beds of hard, dense, gray limestone occur near the top of the Ogallala formation in the northwestern part of Graham County. The beds are as much as 4 or 5 feet thick in some places. The limestone probably was deposited as a surface or nearsurface caliche by subsurface waters heavily charged with calcium carbonate. One prospect is mapped on plate 1 in the NWiNEi sec. 4, T. 6 S., R. 25 W.

Representative measured sections.

(1) A road cut in the NEiNEi sec. 32, T. 7 S., R. 24 W., shows the following section of the
Ogallala formation:

i Feet Ogallala formation:
Mortar bed, fine, sandy, fairly
hard, gray............................ 5.0 Silt, clayey, lenticular, light
green-gray............................ .9 Silt; some fine sand; soft; brown, weathers light tan...................... .8 Sand, silty; brown, weathers light
brown................................. .6 Sand, fine, partly cemented; green
gray, weathers gray.................... 0.1 Sand; occasional small gravel particles not cemented; brown, weathers light gray.................... .5 Silt, sandy, somewhat cemented; dark brown, weathers light brown....... .1 Sand, fine, somewhat cemented; brown, weathers light brown............ .3 Sand; scattered gravel particles; somewhat cemented; green gray, weathers gray......................... 1.0

Base covered.

9.3

(2) The following section of the Ogallala formation was measured in a road cut in the sec. 6, T. 9 S., R. 21 W.:

' Feet Ogallala formation:
Quartzite, fine-grained, -very hard; green, weathers gray................. 3.1 Silt, brown; scattered sand and gravel particles...................... .5 Quartzite, fine-grained, very hard; green, weathers gray................. 1. 6 Silt, calcareous; occasional sand and gravel particles; brown............ 5. 5

Base covered.

9.9

Thickness. --The Ogallala formation is thickest
along the western boundary of Graham County, where it may reach an estimated maximum thickness of about 100 feet. It thins somewhat toward the east, and along the eastern boundary its maximum thickness is probably less than 50 feet. The formation is thickest in the center of the interstream areas and tapers to a feather edge along the stream valleys.

Construction materials.
Riprap. Structural stone. Road metal. Aggregate for concrete. Calcareous binder.
Sanborn formation
Area! distribution. The Sanborn formation of Pleistocene and Recent (?) age is the.most widely distributed stratigraphic unit cropping out in Graham County. (See pi. I and fig. 4.) It occurs as an extensive blanket of silt of variable thickness capping the interstreani areas and as a discontinuous deposit of silt part way up the valley walls of the major streams and their larger tributaries. This discontinuous deposit is well developed along the south side of the South Fork Solomon River Valley just south of Hill City. The two phases of the Sanborn are mapped as a single stratigraphic unit because their lithologic characteristics are similar.
The Sanborn formation is separated from all older stratigraphic units by a well-marked erosional break. It overlies the Ogallala formation in the interstream areas and the Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation and the Pierre shale along the stream courses. (See fig. 5.)
General description. The Sanborn formation is composed of materials deposited by streams, slope wash, and wind and through the action of gravity. No attempt was made to subdivide the formation into members as was done by Frye and Fent 10/ in Norton County! To do so would have required a greatly expanded field program, including test drilling. The treatment of the Sanborn formation as an undivided unit seems adequate to serve the purpose of this inventory of construction materials.
Silt-size particles predominate in the upper part of the formation. Occasional particles of sand and gravel, however, are scattered throughout the silt and" locally may be concentrated in thin lenses. The color varies from medium gray in the northwestern part of the county to yellow brown in the southeastern part.
There is a well-developed soil zone at the top of the formation, and a buried soil zone is reported by Hibbard, Frye, and Leonard, ll/ Its presence in Graham County was confirmed by the field party. The "A" zone of the profile averages about a foot in thickness and is underlain by a prominent "B" zone several times as thick. The "B" zone is characterized by secondary deposits of calcium carbonate in the form of pipelike concretionary masses, stringers, nodules, and impregnations. The "C" zone of the soil profile does not contain unusual concentrations of-secondary calcium carbonate.
10Frye, J. C., and Fent. 0. S., Late Pleistocene loesses of central Kansas: Geol. Survey Bull. 70, pt. 3, pp. 41-51, 1947.
uHibbard, C. W., Frye, J. C., and Leonard, A. B., Reconnaissance of Pleistocene deposits in northcentral Kansas: Kansas Geol. Survey Bull. 52, pt. 1. p. 13, 1944.

Silts of the Sanborn formation exhibit a marked tendency to stand in vertical cut banks and often show a crude columnar structure. The columnar structure is the result of the intersection of irregular joint planes.
The basal part of the formation includes numerous local lenses of tan-gray sand or gravel, or both. The gravel lenses consist of fragments of local limestone, mortar bed, quartzite, quartz, feldspar, chert, and calcite. The sands are predominantly particles of quartz and feldspar. The lenses are channel deposits and generally pinch out within relatively short distances. Their average thickness is about 4 feet, although in one -location there is a sand and gravel lens 24 feet thick. (See representative measured section.) This phase is well displayed, also, in a road cut along U. S. 24 in the SEiNEi sec. 8, T. 8 S. , R. 22 W., . and in numerous road cuts and cut banks in the southcentral and southeastern parts of the county.
Landes 12/ reports a deposit of volcanic ash about 1. 5 miles north of Morland. This probably is a deposit in the NEiSWi sec. 11, T. 8 S., R. 25 W., that consists of thin lenses of light-gray volcanic ash interbedded with thin lenses of sand and fine gravel, all of which are embedded in a light-brown mixture of ash and silt. The upper part of the deposit contains channel fillings of gravel apparently reworked from the Ogallala formation. The gravel particles include numerous fragments of mortar bed and quartzite. The Ogallala formation crops out in the same vicinity, but the contact between the ash and the Ogallala is buried. The age of the ash is uncertain, therefore, but the deposit is assigned tentatively to the basal part of the Sanborn formation on the basis of the reworked Ogallala rocks in the channel fills.
A deposit of ash and interbedded silty ash was found by the field party in the NWiNEi sec. 30, T. 10 S., R. 21 W. The layers of ash are relatively free from adulterants, but the quantity available here is not more than several hundred cubic yards. The deposit is assigned to the basal part of the Sanborn formation. Another small deposit of the same age was noted in , the NWiNEi sec. 1, T. 8 S., R. 24 W., but the ash is adulterated by an extensive mixture of silt.
The fossil shells of snails (gastropods) are fairly abundant in the Sanborn formation.
Erosion of the Sanborn formation generally produces a smoothly undulating surface. Along the walls of valleys that have been cut into underlying stratigraphic units the Sanborn may develop "catstep" erosion. The catsteps appear to be caused by the sliding of water-saturated silt under the influence of gravity down the gentle valley walls toward the stream. The catsteps are bounded by scarps a foot or more high and are slump blocks from several feet to about 20 feet wide. Two or more series of catsteps may develop along the valley slopes.
Representative measured section. --Thefollowing section of the Sanborn formation was measured in a cut bank of a tributary to the Saline River in the NEiSWi sec. 26, T. 10 S., R. 21 W.:
12Londes, K. K., Mineral resources of Kansas counties: Kansas Geol. Survey Bull. 38, No. 11, p. 37, 1937.

Feet Soil, silty, calcareous, brown. ........... . 1. 5 Sanborn formation:
Silt; calcareous concretions scat-
tered throughout; yellowish brown, weathers light brown. ................ 2. 0 Sand, silty; some scattered gravel particles up to 1 inch in diameter; dark brown, weathers light brown; fossil gastropod shells. ............... 1. 2 Sand; some gravel-size particles, including local limestones; gray brown, weathers gray. ................ 1. 5 Sand, very fine, silty, calcareous; gray, weathers light gray; numerous fossil gastropod shells. ............ .9 Sand; small scattered gravel particles; light brown, weathers
gray. ................................ .3 Silt, clayey; dark gray, weathers light gray; shows columnar structure; fossil gastropod shells. ........... 1. 5 Silt; light brown, weathers light
gray; shows columnar structure; fossil gastropod shells. ............... .2. 8 Silt, sandy; gray brown, weathers gray; columnar structure; fossil
gastropod shells. ..................... 1. 5 Sand, silty; occasional small gravel particles; yellow brown, weathers gray brown; columnar structure; fossil gastropod shells. ..... 1. 4 Silt, clayey; small amount of fine gravel; mottled brown and yellow; fossil gastropod shells. ............... 1. 1 Silt, sandy; yellow brown, weathers light gray. .......................... 1.0 Sand and coarse gravel, latter with many local limestone par tides; light gray to brown, weathers light gray. ................ 24.0

Underlain by Smoky Hill chalk member of Niobrara formation.

Thickness. The thickness of the Sanborn formation in Graham County varies from a feather edge along the valleys to a maximum thickness of about 50 feet in the high interstream areas of the northwestern part of the county. Its average thickness is probably between 15 and 25 feet.

Construction materials.

Aggregate for concrete. Mineral filler. Road metal. Volcanic ash.

Terrace deposits

Area! distribution. --Terrace deposits are . developed extensively in the valley of the South Fork Solomon River. (See pi. 1 and fig. 4. ) The width of these terraces varies -from 1. 5 to 2 miles. Bow Creek, in the northern part of the county, has a much smaller terrace, its width ranging from 0. 2 mile in the western part of the county to 0. 5 mile in the eastern part. Fingerlike extensions of the terrace deposits, some of them as much as 12 miles long,

10

project into the valleys of streams tributary to these major drainage lines. Two or more terrace levels are recognized in Graham County but are mapped as a single stratigraphic unit inasmuch as the sediments composing them are similar. The terrace deposits are separated by erosional breaks from both older and younger stratigraphic units. (See fig. 5.)
General description. The terrace sediments are composed predominantly of reddish-brown siltsize particles, but occasional lenses of sand or gravelly sand occur in the basal part of the formation. The gravel-size fraction consists for the most part of soft local limestone particles. Only the terraces of the South Fork Solomon River Valley contain sandgravel lenses; those of Bow Creek Valley are composed entirely of silt. The physical characteristics of the silty part of the terrace deposits essentially duplicate those of the silty phase of the Sanborn formation.
Representative measured section. The lithology of the terrace deposits is so similar to that of the Sanborn formation that it was not thought necessary to measure a representative section.
Thickness. The estimated maximum thickness of the South Fork Solomon River terrace deposits is 50 feet. The terrace deposits of Bow Creek Valley probably are no more than 15 or 20 feet thick, and those of the larger tributary valleys are even thinner.
Construction materials.
Aggregate for concrete. Road metal. Mineral filler.
Dune sand
Area! distribution. Several deposits of dune sand in the east-central part of Graham County are mapped. (See pi. 1 and fig. 4.) The dunes usually cover areas of only a few hundred square yards, but one deposit about 4 miles north of Bogue extends over more than a square mile.
General description. The sand of which the dunes are composed was deposited by wind within recent geologic time and is being deposited even now. The material is a fine, brownish-tan, cross-bedded sand. The South Fork Solomon River is the source of the sand that forms the dunes located in the valley between the stream channel and the north valley wall. The sand was carried to its present position by dryseason winds blowing prevailingly from the south and southwest.
The extensive area of dune sand north of Bogue is on a fairly high interstream area. The dunes are composed of sand-size, subangular to subrounded, somewhat frosted grains of quartz and, to a lesser extent,' of feldspar. The characteristic hummocky topography is subdued, and the "A" soil zone is silty, indicating that the dunes are fairly old. Cultivation of some of the land within very recent times has broken the sod anchor and allowed the wind to blow the sand again. The sand probably was derived originally from the Ogallala formation, which crops out in the area adjacent on the west and north. Several small, low buttes capped by mortar-bed ledges of

Cgallala age are surrounded by sand now being reworked by the wind.
Representative measured section. The dune sand is so homogeneous throughout that it was not thought necessary to measure a section of it.
Thickness. The average thickness of the dune sand is about 10 feet, but the crests of the higher dunes in the valley of the South Fork Solomon River rise as high as 20 feet above the base of the deposit and some of the dunes in the area north of Bogue art at least 30 feet high.
Construction materials.
Aggregate for concrete. Road metal.
Alluvium
Area! distribution. --The deposits formed by streams in their present gradational cycles are mapped as alluvium. (See pi. 1 and fig. 4.) They and the dune sands constitute the most recent stratigraphic units in Graham County. Alluvium is defined in this report as the material which underlies the present flood plain of a stream. The flood plain is the area adjacent to the stream channel that is covered by water during normal flood stage.
Alluvium is mapped along the South Fork Solomon River only. Alluvial deposits are also present in some of the larger tributary valleys and along Bow Creek but could not be shown because' of the map scale. The alluvial deposits of the South . Fork Solomon River average about 0.3 mile in width.
General description. The alluvium of the South Fork Solomon River is quite sandy, and numerous lenses of rounded gravel are interbedded with the sand. The gravel particles are rock fragments weathered and eroded from local stratigraphic units. Silt is characteristic of the upper part of the formation only.
Representative measured section. --The relief of the alluvium is so low that a representative section could not be measured.
Thickness. --The exact thickness, of. the alluvium could have been determined only by test drilling. It is estimated that the maximum thickness is no more than 20 feet and probably is somewhat less than that.
Construction materials. --
Aggregate for concrete. Road metal.
INVENTORY OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
General
The objectives of this inventory of construction materials in Graham County are to define the construction materials as as they are classified and to relate the materials to the map units in which they occur.

Whenever available, laboratory test data have been introduced into the report to aid the reader in the evaluation of the materials. The information given-in table 1 is based on standard testing procedures of the American Association of State Highway Officials 13/ and the State Highway Commission of Kansas. It is expected that prospects listed in this report will be proved by subsequent augering, drilling, or test pitting and that the materials themselves will be subjected to laboratory testing prior, to production for specific uses.
Although numerous prospect pits and quarries were located in the field, no attempt was made to complete an exhaustive survey of all possible sources. If the construction materials that are available in Graham County can be related to the geologic formations mapped on plate 1, then the use of that map will aid the field man in his search for the materials needed in a construction project. It will eliminate the nonproductive areas from the search and, at the same time, will indicate the areas in which the needed materials are most likely to occur.
Aggregate for concrete
Engineering and geologic characteristics
Aggregate for concrete is classified as fine aggregate and mixed aggregate in table 1 and on plate 1. In this report the distinction is an arbitrary one based on the percentage of material retained on a standard No. 4 sieve. The portion of a sample retained on that sieve is designated as the coarse fraction. The material is classified as a mixed aggregate if the coarse fraction is 5 percent or more by weight of the whole sample and as a fine aggregate if the coarse fraction is less than 5 percent. Fine and mixed aggregate will be considered together because of the standard practice of bringing the grading to specifications by sweetening or screening.
The materials reported in this and other classifications are exposed at the surface or are under unconsolidated overburden sufficiently thin that they may be economically developed. Because of the added expense in the removal of the overburden, deposits of sand and gravel overlain by thick or consolidated beds usually are not included, nor are relatively inaccessible deposits; exceptions to this practice are noted in the "Remarks" column of table 1.
13American Association of State Highway Officials, Standard specifications far highway materials and methods of sampling and testing; pt. 2, 5th ed., 361 pp., 1947.
Absorption, pp. 251-252. Coaptwsive strength, pp. 257-2%. Deval abrasion, pp. 235-236. Liquid limit, pp. 198-201. Los Angeles abrasion, pp. 237-239* Plasticity indwc, pp. 202-204. Specific gravity, pp. 249-250. TougtoMs, pp. 240-241. Weight per cubic foot, pp. 253-254. State Highway Commission of Kansas, Standard spedIcations for State road and bridge construction, 512 PP., 1945. Gradation factor, p. 16. Sieve analysis, pp. 333-334. Soundness, pp. 335-336.

11

Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics
The following Stratigraphic units are actual or potential sources of aggregate'for concrete:
(1) Ogallala formation. Only one of the .aggregate samples listed in table 1 (fa 1) was taken from the Ogallala formation, but in other counties of western Kansas the Ogallala is known to be an important source of both tine and mixed aggregates. The one sample analyzed is composed predominantly of fragments of quartz, feldspar, and basic igneous rocks. A small amount of chalk and a moderate percentage of limonite nodules are present in the coarse fraction. The coarse fraction, however, accounts for only 3 percent of the weight of the sample, so that these materials probably are not present in deleterious^ quantities. The test characteristics of the sample indicate that it may be acceptable. for use as fine aggregate for concrete.
The field party in Graham County encountered numerous other occurrences of sands or gravelly sands in the Ogallala formation. In these, however, the presence of hard ledges of mortar bed or quartzite constitutes such an overburden problem that the deposits cannot be developed economically by present-day methods. Intensive exploration of the mapped outcrop areas of the Ogallala formation probably will result in the location of sand and gravel deposits under no more than unconsolidated overburden.
(2) Sanborn formation. The Sariborn formation ,s the source of four samples of fine aggregate (fa 3, fa 4, fa 6, and fa 7) and three of mixed aggregate (ma 1, ma 6, and ma 7). These are mapped on plate 1, and their test data are given in table 1. The mineralogical analyses indicate that the fine fraction of aggregates from the Sanborn formation is composed predominantly of quartz and feldspar particles. There are significant percentages of mortar-bed fragments in the coarse fraction of three samples analyzed (fa 6, fa 7, and ma 1), but the mortar-bed particles are fairly hard and probably are not deleterious. Fifteen percent quartzite fragments is included in the coarse fraction of sample fa 9, but that fraction constitutes only 2 percent of the total sample weight, and the quartzite probably is not present in a deleterious quantity.
The test characteristics of all the Sanborn formation samples indicate that the material may be acceptable as aggregate for concrete. Sand and gravel lenses in the base of the Sanborn formation are wide spread over Graham County but generally are limited in size. Undoubtedly, additional prospects can be located in the basal part of this formation, and exploration will be most profitable if the marginal areas of the mapped outcrops of the Sanborn are explored. Present-day streams iiave cut deepest into the Sanborn in such areas and are most likely to have exposed the basal sand and gravel lenses.
(3) Terrace deposits. No samples of sand and gravel were obtained from the terrace deposits, but the material is composed predominantly of quartz particles. It contains a subordinate amount of feldspar particles, and minor quantities of fragments of basic igneous rocks and local limestones also are present.

The sand and gravel lenses occur in the basal part of the terrace deposits, and because the deposits are channel fills, the quantity of material in any one deposit probably will be limited. Such sand and gravel deposits may be located by intensive exploration of the terrace deposits- in the valleys of the South Fork Solomon River and its larger tributaries, as well as in the valleys of tributaries to the Saline River in the southern border area of Graham County. Field examination revealed that the terrace deposits of Bow Creek Valley are predominantly silt and that sands and gravels can be present only at some depth below the surface.
_ (4) Dune sand. One sample of dune sand (fa 2) was tested and is classified as fine aggregate. (See table 1 and pi. 1.) The material is a very fine sand composed predominantly of quartz particles but with minoi* amounts of feldspar, acid igneous rock, and basic igneous rock particles also present. Additional sources of similar materials are mapped as dune sand on plate 1.
(5) Alluvium. One sample of fine aggregate (fa 5) and four of mixed aggregate (ma 2, ma 3, ma 4, and ma 5) from the alluvium are listed in table 1, and , the sample locations are mapped on plate 1. Alluvial deposits are now the most active sources of aggregate in Graham County. No samples were collected for mineral analysis, but on the basis of the generalized sample descriptions, the alluvial sands and gravels appear to be composed predominantly of fragments of quartz and igneous rocks with perhaps fairly heavy mixtures of calcareous particles in the coarse fraction. These particles probably are relatively soft local limestone'and somewhat harder Ogallala mortarbed fragments. The test characteristics indicate that alluvial sands and gravels-may be acceptable for use in concrete. Additional aggregate materials are present in the alluvial deposits of the South Fork Solomon River in Graham County.
Road metal
Engineering and geologic characteristics
Road metal, known also as surfacing material, crushed stone, and aggregate, is defined in .this report as any material that may be applied to a road to improve the performance characteristics of that road. The geologic materials classed as road metal differ from one area to another. The following materials are available in Graham County for use as road metal:
«$ (1) Sources of aggregate for concrete.
(2) Crushed rock. Indurated rocks available in Graham County for use as crushed stone in road construction, filter bed for earthen dams, or railway ballast are (a) limestone, a compact, massive layer of calcareous material, variable in its hardness; (b) silicified chalk, a compact, massive, originally calcareous rock that has been more or less completely replaced by silica (the known deposits of silicified chalk in Graham County are not mapped on plate 1 but are discussed under, the Smoky Hill chalk member of .the Niobrara formation); (c5 quartzite, a massive, compact rock of variable hardness composed of sand or gravel particles (or both), usually firmly cemented by interstitial silica; (d) mortar'bed, a massive, compact rock of

variable hardness composed of sand or gravel particles (or both), more or less firmly cemented by interstitial calcium carbonate.
Three of these materials are mapped on plate 1 and listed more specifically in table 1 as limestone, quartzite, and mortar bed, because, in addition to their use as road metal, some of them may be used as structural stone and riprap.

Some light-traffic roads in north-central Kansas have been metaled with crushed rock quarried from the hard limestone bed near the top of the Ogallala formation. Field observation indicates that the material performs satisfactorily when so used.
Mineral filler
Engineering and geologic characteristics

Stratigfaphtc sources and performance characteristics '
(1) Sources of aggregate for concrete. The materials listecfin the section on aggregate for concrete have been used in the construction of bituminous -mat and water -bound macadam roads and as surfacing material on many light-traffic roads within the county. Field observation indicates that they are adequate for these purposes.

Material composed predominantly of silt-size mineral particles (50 percent or more of which pass the No. 200 sieve) is classified in this report as mineral filler. It has no more than a trace of sticks or other'organic debris but may contain minor amounts of fine sand or clay. S. E. Horner, of the State Highway Commission of Kansas, states in a letter dated January 4, 1947, that material will qualify for mineral filler if laboratory tests indicate a low coefficient of
cementation.

(2) Crushed rock.
(a) Smoky Hill chalk member of_the Niobrara formation. Silicified chalk from the Smoky Hill chalk member has been uses as surfacing material on some roads in Graham County, and the county engineer reports that it is satisfactory if a thick application of material is laid down.
The beds of chalky limestones and shales in this member are used in the construction of light -traffic roads of the water -bound macadam type. This use also has been observed in other Kansas counties.
(b) Ogallala formation. Crushed quartzite hasbeen used on several roads in Graham County as surfacing material. Field observation indicates that it is advisable to crush the quartzite to particle sizes less than 0. 5 inch in diameter because particles larger than this tend to kick out from the road.
Crushed quartzite is reported by W. E. Gibson, engineer of tests, State Highway Commission of Kansas, to have been used in the construction of concrete pavement in Hill City. The pavement shows no evidence of failure due to reaction between the quartzite and the portland cement. It is to be noted, however, that the pavement is not in a water -saturated environment.
The more important operated or prospect quarries are mapped on plate 1, and the chemical compositions and test characteristics of some of the quartzites are listed in table 1. The amount of quartzite available in Graham County is almost unlimited, and a quarry could be opened in this material at almost any convenient site in the central part of the county.
Mortar -bed material from the Ogallala formation has been used in the construction of a county road south of Penokee, apparently with satisfactory results. Fairly soft mortar beds can be crushed and worked into a water -bound macadam type of construction. The calcium carbonate cement resets under this treatment to bind the sand and gravel particles of the mortar bed and thus form a firm surface course for lighttraffic roads.
13

Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics""
W Sanborn formation. Two samples of mineral filler were obtained from the Sanborn formation (mf 1 and mf 2); the' sample locations are mapped on plate 1, and the test characteristics are given in table 1. Test data indicate that the material probably is satisfactory for use as mineral filler but that the cementation factor might be excessive. It is probable that the samples were taken from the "B" zone of the soil profile, because the high-cementation factors undoubtedly are the result of impregnation of the silt with calcium carbonate deposited by percolating subsurface waters. Silt in the Sanborn formation taken from below the "B" zone should have a cementation factor within acceptable limits. This Stratigraphic unit is the principal source of mineral filler in Graham County, and because of the widespread availability of the silt, it was not thought necessary to map any more than these two prospects. Pits can be opened in the formation wherever it is desired to use the silt in engineering construction. It is recommended that the material be laboratorytested and its cementation factor determined prior to the development of a site.
(2) Terrace deposits. Two samples of silt from terrace deposits along the South Fork Solomon River (mf 3 and mf 4) were tested. The data are given in table 1, and the locations are mapped on plate 1. The test characteristics of these samples are similar to those of the mineral-filler samples from the Sanborn formation that were tested.
Volcanic ash
Engineering and geologic characteristics
Volcanic ash is sometimes classified as mineral filler, but in this report it is distinguished as a special type of mineral filler because it is suitable for certain uses to which the usual silty filler is not adapted. Volcanic ash consists predominantly of the fine, glasslike shards ejected during the explosive phase of a volcanic eruption. The ash may include clay- or silt-size particles of other origins and occasional thin seams of gravel and sand.

Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics
Two deposits of impure volcanic ash were observed by the Graham County field party. One of these, in the NEiSWi sec. 11, T, 8 S., R. 25 W., is tentatively classified as belonging to the Sanborn formation; the other, in the NE^SWi sec. 15, T. 8 S., R. 25 W., is in the basal part of a high-level terrace deposit. Deposits of volcanic ash of both Ogallala and Sanborn age occur with some frequency in western Kansas, but volcanic ash is less common in terrace deposits than elsewhere.

mortar-bed blocks measuring about a foot on a side and, when examined in 1947, showed no marked evidences of deterioration of the riprap blocks. Mortarbed ledges vary greatly in hardness within short distances, and a constant check of hardness will be necessary to assure acceptable rock.
The dense, hard limestone layer found near the . top of the Ogallala formation in the northwestern part of Graham County appears adequate for use as riprap, although no such use was observed in this county.
Structural stone

It is entirely likely that ash deposits of commercial quality and quantity might be found in Graham County if an intensive program of field exploration were undertaken. The position of the volcanic ash within the Ogallala formation is variable, but in the Sanborn formation the ash generally is found in the basal part. Prospecting probably will be most profitable in the marginal parts of the mapped outcrop areas of the Sanborn where the base of the formation has been exposed.
Riprap
Engineering and geologic characteristics
Riprap, as defined in this report, is any material suitable for protecting earthen fills from erosion. To be acceptable for this use the material must be relatively sound and free from cracks and other structural defects or impurities that would cause it to disintegrate through abrasion, slaking, or freeze-and-thaw. It is desirable that the material be in blocks having approximately rectangular faces 7 inches or more in width and that the specific gravity be 2 or higher.
Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics
(1) Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation. The silicified chalk in this Stratigraphic unit appears acceptable as riprap for earthen structures. Similar uses of the silicified chalk have been observed in other Kansas counties, and its performance is satisfactory. The presently known occurrences in Graham County are in .the Penokee and Morland areas.
(2) Ogallala formation. The quartzites of the Ogallala formation are acceptable as riprap on the basis of test characteristics (table 1) and field observation. The material is sound, its specific gravity is adequate, and its abrasion loss is relatively low. The upstream face of the Antelope Lake dam in the NE^ sec. 9, T. 8 S., R. 25 W., was riprapped with quartzite blocks about 1937. The riprap was inspected in 1948 and showed no indication of deterioration, either at the water line or on the freeboard of the dam. Quarries could be opened in quartzite ledges of the Ogallala in many parts of Graham County.
Mortar-bed ledges in the Ogallala formation vary in hardness; some are cemented firmly enough that they are satisfactory as riprap. One of the mortarbed samples tested (mb 2) has been accepted for this use by the State Highway Commission of Kansas. A small earthen dam constructed in 1935 in the SWiSWi sec. 28, T. 10 S., R. 22 W., was riprapped with
14

Engineering and geologic characteristics
Structural stone, as defined in this report, is any hard, dense rock material that can be quarried and produced to the desired size and shape. Materials fulfilling these requirements occur in the Smoky Hill chalk member of the Niobrara formation and in the Ogallala formation.
Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics
(1) Smoky Hill chalk member of the Ntobrara formation. Test characteristics and field observations of the more massive beds of chalky limestone in the Smoky Hill member indicate that the limestone is acceptable for use as structural stone. No such use was observed in Graham County, but farm buildings observed elsewhere in Kansas indicate that the stone is satisfactory if it is not used in a place where it will be subjected to water saturation. The chalky limestone deteriorates rapidly in the presence of water, either by slaking or freeze-and-thaw.
The silicified chalks locally present in the Smoky Hill chalk member are potentially useful as structural stone. The material is unusually hard, however, and producing it to the desired size and shape may be an excessive cost factor. r)In addition, its brittleness may cause it to shatter too much during the quarrying operation. The chemical properties of the silicified chalk are probably similar to those of quartzite.
(2) Ogallala formation. Quartzites of the Ogallala formation were used in the construction of the city hall and the buildings in the city park of Hill City and in Antelope Lake Park. Field observations of these structures in 1947 and 1948 disclosed no evidences of surface deterioration or excessive reaction with the mortar, but it is possible, according to Mansfield Merriman, Bureau of Reclamation, United States Department of the Interior, that failure through mortar reaction may occur in structures or parts of structures immersed in water. Because of the hardness of the quartzite, the process of producing it to the desired size and shape may be costly.
Hard mortar-bed ledges in the Ogallala have been used as structural stone in other counties in western Kansas, as in the grade-school building at Traer, Norton County. Field observation indicates that the harder mortar-bed ledges perform satisfactorily when so used. It is recommended that a constant check be made of the quality of this stone because of rapid lateral.variations in mortar beds.

Stone quarried from the hard local limestone bed near the top of the Cgallala formation was used in the construction of the church in New Almelo, Norton County, Kans. The stone is not too pleasing in appearance but has stood up very well for nearly 50 years.
Calcareous binder
Engineering and geologic characteristics
To be classified as calcareous binder the material must be composed essentially of calcium carbonate and must be soft and easily pulverized. A variety of geologic materials is included in this classification.
Stratigraphic sources and performance characteristics
(1) Smoky Hill chalk member jof the Niobrara for mation. The chalk beds in the Smoky Hill chalk

member have been accepted by the State Highway Commission of Kansas as calcareous binder. Although no one of them in Graham County was tested for this use, the chalk appears to be acceptable because it is soft and easily pulverized. The fact that the chalky limestones are relatively thin probably is not a serious objection inasmuch as the shales interbedded with the limestones also contain a high percentage of calcium carbonate.
(2) Ogalla formation. Relatively soft ledges of mortar bed in the 6gallala formation at sites in other Kansas counties have been tested by the State Highway Commission and accepted as calcareous binder. Field observation indicates that similar beds in Graham County probably are acceptable for this use. The mortar beds contain a very high percentage of calcium carbonate, and some of them are sufficiently soft that they can be pulverized easily. The material is widely distributed throughout the mapped outcrop area of the Ogallala formation.

15 U»ri»*-0»|i«*ttat 8MUOB. HMklnftoB, p. c.

J!

0) Q) H
Upper Cretaceous

Pliooene

I

CRETACEOUS

TERTIARY

0) N| H
Pleistocene and Recent
^U-s
h
«f D
i*!>g
^8 o-
: sr ll
HI
QUATERNARY

mx
TJ
O

O
1
m
p
CJI
m

SOUTHWEST QUARTER CIRCULAR 51 PLATE I
Base map enlarged photostatically from map compiled by the Soil Conservation Service, U. S. Department of Agriculture.

SOUTHEAST QUARTER CIRCULAR 51 PLATE I
Geologic contact
Operated pit or quarry
Prospect pit or quarry
Is
Limestone
Q Quartzite
mb
Mortar bed
fa
Fine aggregate
ma
Mixed aggregate
mf
Mineral filler
va
Volcanic ash
ma
Inclined letters indicate materials not tested
ma 4
Vertical letters indicate materials listed in table 1, and their sample number
15.0
Quantity of material available (in units of 1O.OOO cubic yards)
Federal U. S. Highway
State highway
Railway
City
Section line
Township corner
Permanent stream
Intermittent stream
Artificial lake
Line of cross section (on north-south road between sections 23 and 24, T. 8 S., R. 23 W., and sections 13 and 14, T. 9 S., R. 23 W.)

APPROXIMATE MEAN DECLINATION. 1847

Geology mapped by V. B. Coombs and C. W. Matthews in 1947.

MAP SHOWING CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND GEOLOGY OF GRAHAM COUNTY, KANSAS

Scale

4 Miles

1951

Table l.-Summary of materials tests
[Blank spaces indicate data not available]

o
Npuolmobnteerl Closifcotior mtohteerio
fal

Location

f1rac/ti4on
J

1
"o

SW SE 8 6

Average thickness
Overburden

Ac es ibilty

J III* LeUn c3r Xc o3

§-

(feient)

21 30,000 30 2-10 Goad

Geologic formation Ogallola

£~0
11
SHCK USGS

fa 2 SE NW 8 8 21 150,000 20 0 do

Dune sand

do

Fogignregeote fo3 SW SE 14 8 21

5,000 10 1 do

Sanborn

do

fa 4 NE SE 7 8 22 6.0OO e 1.5 do

do SHCK

fa 5 NW 24 8 24 fa 6 SW NW 12 10 22 fa 7 NW NE 25 10 22 mol NE SW 13 6 25

30,000 12 0 do 6,500 5 0-5 do 7.5OO 8-10 1-3 do 5.0OO 8-12 5-8 Fair

Alluvium Sanborn
do do

do
SHCK USGS
do
do

ma 2

SW 8 8 21

15,000 12 0 Good

Alluvium

SHCK

Mogigxregdate ma 3

N S 24 8 23

ma4 E5 SE 14 8 25

15,000 14 8,OOO II

O Fair 0 Good

do do

do do

maS NW 17 8 25 2O.OOO 15 0 do

do

do

ma6

NE 9 9 24

2,000

Sanborn

do

ma7

NE 21 10 23

9.000

Poor

mfl NW NW 30 6 21 150,000 25 0 Good
V
mf2 SW SE 28 6 25 I50.00O 15+ 2 do

do do do

do
SHCK USGS
do

I0 mf3 NW NW, 9

8 21

I5O.OOO 10 2

S mf4 si NE 14 8 25 I5O.OOO 15 2

do do

Terroce deposit do

do do

i mbl

SW 33 7 24 800 tons 6 0 Fair

mb2 S5 5 8 25 50O1ons 6 O do

o 2 mb3 NE NW 19 10 22

5,000 6-8 O-8 Good

ql si SE 23 7 22 20.00O 4 0-5 Fair

Ogallala do do do

SHCK
do
SHCK USGS SHCK

q2
Quortzite q3

NE 31 NE 31

7 22 7 22

q4 SW SE 34 8 22

50,OOO 6 1 Good 50.OOO 5 O-IO do 3.00O 10 O-3 do

do do do

do CE do

q5 NE SW 36 8 23

4.OOO 5

do

do

SHCK

q6 NE NE 14 8 24

10,000 4 1

do

do

do

Sieve analysis

Description of the material 2

Laboratory test data

"en

e*O

c

E! 8

o "c

o cO

, 1 1 fteiQ>~

a> o

h 1 CI

[Fraction IM
O
o

fe 5

J2
oo 0 "e0n
o ? CD

T.aaJ>

[Carbonate Iminerals

fe

o

en

fouobtfcifcry) /epigehrt

Sgpreacvifitcy (saturated)

Gradation

foctor

Compressive
strength ratio

o> « Vo< c

~= £

S3oundnes

0t: (cy2cl5es) a

Toughnes

en

o o"5jc

oo rO o" 0 ">

Cementation

Absorption

o
S

Remarks

9-47 0 1

3

27

94

5.3

C 33 F 87

15 7

33 3

4

15 3

08.7 2.56 2.78 1.00 0.99

0.94

Overburden is silt ond thin mortar bed; fairly high percentage of llmon-
Cl
ite nodules.

7-47

0

95

Q64

C F

90

5

23

do

2

2

2

40

97

2.61

C 80 F 91

15 7

2 1

Tr
3 Tr 1

102.8 2.61 1.89 0.92 0.92 105.9 2.60 3.19 1.42 1.38

Gradation factor and compressive-strength ratios low.
Cl
Itst Overburden is silt.

2-46 0 1 2 27 96 3.0

106.0 2.58 2.85 1.34 1.16

Average of II auger samples. Overburden is silt.

do 0 1 3 17 93 5.4

7-47

0

2

29 91

4.74

C F

34 85

24 8

2 1

15 4 Tr

15

do

0

1

6

96

3.29

C F

65 92

20 f

Tr II 2 12

8-47 0

2

10

52

93

5.72

C F

50 80

25 15

fr 25 5 Tr

4-42 8 9 13 34 97

Siliceous and calcareous particles.

2.58 2.24 1.06 1.12 308 0.65

2 1

107.1

2.60 2.68 1.30

1.31

2 101.3 2.60 2.16 1.02 0.98

116.5 £59 3.35 1.65 1.81

109.0 2.62 3.39 1.24 1.15 300 0.85

Average of II auger samples.

Cl

Overburden is silt of the Sanborn formation; 8% brown siltstone and fairly high percentages of mortar bed and quartzile fragments in coarse fraction

Itst Overburden is silt of the Sanborn formation.

Overburden is silt of the Sanborn formation-, high percentage of mortarCl bed fragments in coarse fraction.

2-46 1 3 9 43 98 1.5 do 0 3 8 45 96 2.5

107 2.60 109 2.62

1.09 1.1 1 29.6 0.86 1.08 1.10 30.2 0.87

Cl Average of 4 auger samples. Itst Average af 5 auger samples.

4-42 8-46 5-46

1 1
2

2 6 39 99

Siliceous and calcareous particles.

5 17 '59 100 0.26 Siliceous and calcareous particles.

3 5 38 93 5.2O Siliceous and calcareous particles.

II 0.0 2.61 3.31 1.16 1.21 29.8 0.92

112.3 2.62 402 1.55 1.40

0.99

112. l 2.56 3.05 1.47 1.39

0.95

Accepted for use under sections 105, 1 06, lOO to 110, and 112, SHCK specifications. Probably Sanborn; location not certain.
Probably Sanborn; location not certain.

8-47

0 5 93.8 Yellowish-gray silty clay.

73.9 2.58

100+

Cemetation factor high.

do O 4 93.6 Yellow silty clay.

72.6 2.57

100+

Overburden is "A" zone of soil profile; cementation factor high.

do

0 6 61 35.6 Yellowish-gray silty clay-, some fine sand.

96.4 2.61

96 Overburden is "if. zone of soil profile; cementation factor high.

do

0 14 84.8 Dark brownish-gray silty clay.

83.4 2.59

100+

Overburden is "A" zone of soil profile; cementation factor high.

8-32
10-37 8-47 5-46

Soft white limestone with streaks and specks. White limestone.
Light-green sandstone with some coarse grains.

2.35 2.24 2.32 2.33

OK 3 OK, 5 72.4 0.61 46.4 O87 6

4.8
7.2 71 3.O7

Deval abrasion loss, 12.4%; material not acceptable for bituminousmat surface.
Deval abrasion loss, 8.8 %; satisfactory for riprap under sec. 78, SHCK specifications.
Overburden is silt.
Acceptable under sec. 108, SHCK specification*.

1-42

Fine-grained green sandstone

2.34

44.0 OK 6 1.8 Acceptable under sees. 68 to 71, 73, and 76, SHCK specifications.

1-46
10-45 5-46

Chemical composition {%): Si02, 88.09; A^OS, 3.5; Fe203, 1.35; CaO, 0.69;MgO, 1.08; No? 0, 1.01 -,K20, I.47-, undetermined. 0.4; HCI soluble. 4.9.
Chemical composition (%). Si02,97.lil J«203, .26,Fe 2 03 ,04O6-,MgO, O.l;undetermined, 0.02 -, HCI soluble, 3.62. Greenish-gray coarse-grained sandstone.

233 2.38 2.41

OK OK 38.8 0.88 9

2.0 1.05 1.52

Deval abrasion loss, 6.81%; classified as an opaline sandstone; sample locality probably same as q2 above.
Deval abrasion loss, 2.81 %.
Acceptable under sees. 108 to 112 and 114, SHCK specifications.

do

Green coarse-grained sandstone.

2.42

379 0.89 7 1.58 Acceptable under sees. 108 to M2 and 1 1 4, SHCK specifications.

1. SHCK, State Highway Commission of Kansas. SHCK and USGS, sieve analysis and laboratory tests by State Highway Commission of Kansas; sample collection and
description of material by US. Geological Survey. CE,Corps of Engineers,U.S. Army. 2. C, coarse fraction, retained on Na. 4 sieve; F, fine fraction, passed through No. 4
sieve; Tr, trace-, in terms of percent composition. 3. Loss ratio. 4. Cl, clear-, It st, light straw.

I

