DEPAKTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
BULLETIN
OF THE
UNITED STATES
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
No. 34
WASHINGTON
CrOYERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 1880

UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
J. W. POWELL, DIKECTOB
ON THE RELATION
OF THE
LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN FAUNA
TO THAT OF THE
SUCCEEDING FEESH-WATEE EOCENE
AND OTHER GROUPS
BY
CHARLES A. WHITE, M. D.
WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1886

CONTENTS.
Page. General remarks ........................<^.................................... 9 Description of species ....................................................... 20 Mollusca.................................................................... 20
Uniouidae............................................................... 20 Cyrenidae ................................................................ 21 Litnn£eida> .............._ _.............................................. 22 Physidse................................................................ 24 Ancylidso .......... _.................................................. 26 Helicidae................................................................ 26 Pupidse................................................................. 27 Ceripuasiidte............................................................ 28 Kissoidoa.........................r.............-....................'.-.. -30 Viviparidso .............................................................. 31 Urustacea..................................................................... 132 Cypridio................................................................. 32 Index.............._...................................................... 53
(393) 5

-ILLUSTRATIONS.
PftgO.
PLATE I. Viviparus trocbiformis; V. panguitchensis; V. leidyi; V. leidyi var. formosus; V. raynoldsianus .................................... 34
II. Goniobasis tenera; G. filifera; G. nebrascensis; G. tenuicarinata; Limntea?; L. (Leptoliinnaea) ininuscula; Acella micronema; PI anorbis convolntus; P. (Gyranlus) militaris; Viviparus nauus; Hydrobia utabensis; H. recta .................................. 38
III. Phyea pleromatis; Bulinus atavus; Physa kanabensis ? ; P. bullatula............................................................ 42
IV. Unio rectoides; U. mendax; Sphaerium formosum................ 46 V. Unio rectoides ?; Helix adipis; Helix nacimientensis; Pupa leidyi?. 50
(395) 7

RELATION OP THE LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE FAUNAS.
BY CHARLES A, WHITE, M. D.
GENERAL REMARKS.
Certain equivalent strata which are found,exposed at various and widely separated localities in Utah and Southern Wyoming containing fresh-water types only among their fossil molluscan forms, have for several years past been known to contain a few species which are elsewhere characteristic of the Laramie Group. At a few of the localities referred to the strata have been regarded as belonging to the Laramie Group, but generally they have been assigned to the base of the freshwater Eocene series. No difference of opinion seems to have existed among the geologists who have' observed them as to their position in. the stratigraphical series. They seem to have differed only in regard to the position of a plane of demarkation which should separate them from the unmistakable Laramie strata beneath. The strata which are found exposed at the following-named localities are especially referred to in the following remarks: The vicinity of the town of Wales, the valley of Twelve Mile Creek east of Mayfield, the west base of Musinia Mountain all in the large county of San Pete, Utah; Soldier's Fork, Utah County, Utah; Desolation Canon of Green Eiver, Eastern Utah; and near Evanston, Southwestern Wyoming. Besides these, certain localities near Panguitch and Upper Kanab, respectively, in Southern Utah, ought also to be mentioned.
Not having had until the past season a satisfactory opportunity to study the strata at any of the localities just mentioned, I have heretofore regarded them as belonging to the upper part of the Laramie Group, because of the presence in them of the Laramie species referred to. Investigations in Utah during the past season, together with a further study of the collections which .were previously made in that region by different parties of the Government surveys, have satisfied me that the
(397) ' 9

10 LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL. 34.'
strata of the localities which have just been named, although they contain those Laramie species, are all equivalent portions of the Wasatch Group, the lowest group of the purely fresh-waiter Eocene series.
In the prosecution of my field studies during the past season more especial attention was given to the strata which were found exposed in San Pete Valley and the adjacent portion of the Wasatch Mountains. My principal collections of Wasatch fossils were also made from these strata, mainly near the town of Wales, in the hills which form the western side of San Pete Valley. In that vicinity these hills are composed from base to summit of strata of the Wasatch Group, which there reach an estimated thickness of about 2.50.0 feet. These strata consist of sandstones, shales, marlites, and a few layers of impure limestone, resting upon a very coarse conglomerate which forms the base of the hills, all evidently forming one uninterrupted series from bottom to top.1
The base of the Wasatch Group was not recognized at this locality, but it is probably not much beneath the surface of the valley here. Some two or three hundred feet above the conglomerate there is a bed of coal, which has been- worked at several points, the openings being known as the Wales Coal Mines. The fossils which were collected from these strata were found at different horizons, ranging from about 100 feet beneath the coal to the top of the hills, the vertical range of the fossil-bearing strata being more than 1,500 feet. I have recognized 26 species of invertebrate fossils which were obtained here, all plainly belonging to one and the same fauna, and in a layer immediately above the coal some undetermined vertebrate remains were found.
Some of these invertebrate forms are common in the Wasatch Group elsewhere; three or four of them are known to occur also in the Green River Group ; some of them, are characteristic Laramie species, and some
of them are new. A part of them have also been found at the Almy Goal Mines, near Evanston, Wyo., and a part were found by Major Powell in Desolation Canon; others at localities in Southern Utah and at the west base of Musinia Mountain; a part were found by Mr. E. E. Howell. at Twelve Mile Creek, and one of them is apparently identical with a form which Professor Cope obtained from his Pucrco Group in New Mexico.
The .equivalents of the strata which are exposed near the town of Wales are also largely exposed in the Wasatch Mountains upon the east side of San Pete Valley, and, as is mentioned further on, those strata are there found to rest conformably upon the Laramie. It is worthy of note in this connection that the Laramie strata upon which these freshwater Eocene strata rest are referable to the Laramie proper, and not
1 This conglomerate is probably a part of the great Wasatch conglomerate which is so largely exposed in tho valley of Weber River, in Echo Canon, and elso-whore in Southern Utah.
(398)

W MITR. |

GENERAL REMARKS.

11

to the strata known as the Bear River Laramie, upon which the Wasatch apparently lies uncouformably in the vicinity of Evanston.1
The following is a list of the species which, were collected at the Wales locality. They are tabulated so as to show in part the localities and the different horizons at which they have been recognized. Those species which are indicated in the table as ranging from the Laramie into the Wasatch Group have been found mainly in the lower portion of the latter group, but some of them range more than 500 feet above the coal at the Wales locality, which is more than 1,000 feet above the base of the group. Furthermore,' a small number of the species found in the Wasatch strata at the Wales locality are known to range into the Green Eiver Group, and one at least into the Bridger Group. To this list is added the Helix and the Pupa which were obtained by Professor Cope from his Puerco Group in New Mexico. Some of the names
in this list are now regarded as synonyms, as will appear from remarks in connection with the description of species on following pages.

Table allowing ranqe of species.

Wasatch.

List of fossils.

j 4$<o g .si ^

g,

ft 5P
aOa

<D 1

ft c

ITwelve-Mile MnMsiOnDia SFoldoierr's STouJthtertn Eyanston. BCesolation GPareorcno TLyapriacal

BGrridogter

<ot>f
11

Hayden.

y

.
y9

cnla White. Hayden.

vf X

1 There is now some reason to doubt whether the strata which have hitherto been known as the Bear River Laramie should be regarded aa a portion of the Laratnio Group. That their position is between the uppermost of the marine Cretaceous groups and the basal portion of the Wasatch, as is that of the Laramie proper, is apparently beyond question, but so far as is now known not a siugle fossil species is common to both the Bear River strata and the Laramie proper. It seems therefore necessary to infer that the fauna of the former strata lived in a separate body of water; but whether it preceded, followed, or was contemporary with the Laramie cannot be asserted now with confidence. The question ,is rendered still, more obscure by the fact that the Bear River fauna contains types which are not known in any other North American strata, nor among living faunas of this continent. In these discussions reference is made to the fauna of the Laramio proper, and not to that of the Bear River Laramie
1399)

12 LAEAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL. 34. Table showing range of species Continued.
Wasatch.

List of fossils.

i CTwreleve-Mkile; Moausnitnaina. SFooldriekr'.s SUoutahher.n
-*3

Grerno-Buivepr. CDeasonlaotinon. LTaryampiec.*al
GPareorcuop. BGriodugepr.

£ Evanston.

ta
CO

1

Plauorbia (Gyraulus) militaris X White.

X? X

X*

Goniobasis tenuiparinata Meek & Hayden.
Goniobasis nebrascensis Meek & Hayden.

X X

X

- y? XX

Hydrobia utahensis White..-.. X X
X Viviparus trochiformis Meek X X X
& Hayden. Viviparus leidyi Meek & Hay- X X X
don. Viviparus raynoldaianus Meek X
. & Hayden. Viviparus panguitchonsis X X X
White.

X X
XX

X
.
XX

The following general remarks are presented in this connection for the purpose of explaining the relation which the Wasatch Group, as it is developed in Utah, is understood to hold to the Lararnie and other groups. The intimate stratigraphical relation of the Laramie Group to the marine Cretaceous series beneath it has been recognized by every field geologist who has studied those strata, and it is this fact, in addition to the discovery of dinosaurian remains in the Laramie, that has led them to range that group as a member of the Cretaceous series. While there seems to be no reason to doubt that sedimentation was continuous, not only through the marine Cretaceous series, but also from that series into and through the Laramie, it is true that there was at the beginning of the Laramie period a comparatively sudden change in the character
(400)

wmm]

GENERAL REMARKS.

13 >

of the previously existing molluscan fauna over tlie whole area which, was then occupied by the Laramio waters; that is, at a certain horizon in the unbroken succession of strata there is an abrupt disappearance of all distinctively marine forms,1 and an equally abrupt accession of brackish water and fresh water forms which continue through the whole Laramie Group.
On the other hand similar evidence of continuous sedimentation from the Laramie into the Wasatch Group has not hitherto been publicly announced. It is true that a conformity of the Wasatch upon the Laramie in some places has been distinctly recognized by Major Powell 2 and myself, but others have denied the existence of any such conformity.3 Wherever later' strata have been discovered resting upon those of the Laramie Group, as its limits are indicated in note 2, below, they have been found to be free from all fossil forms which can be
reasonably referred to even a slightly saline habitat, while the Laramie strata contain many brackish water forms throughout their vertical range.
That is, those overlying strata contain such genera of fresh-water and land mollusca as characterize existing lakes and rivers and the land adjacent to them. In my former writings upon the Laramie Group I have suggested that its whole molluscan fauna ceased abruptly with the close of that period, for I did not then know that any of the numerous fresh water species of the Laramie Group survived their brackishwater contemporaries and became members of the Wasatch fauna. I thought it probable that the physical changes which attended the extinction of the brackish-water mollusca of the Laramie sea were also attended by a like extinction of their fresh-water contemporaries. Still, I had expressed a hope that certain of the fresh-water species
1 One species each of Nuculana, Axincea, and Odontobasia appears to have survived the partial freshening of the Laramie waters; but this fact is not regarded as affecting the general statement that true marine conditions ceased at the beginning of the Laramie period.
2 Reference is hero made to the Report on the Geology of theUinta Mountains, by J. W. Powell. The plane which he then recognized as separating the Laramie (Pointof Rocks Group) from the marine Cretaceous group beneath it gave certain layers to the Laramie which contain fossils properly belonging to the Cretaceous, but none of which fossils belong to the true Laramie fauna, as it is now understood. He also referred certain layers containing only characteristic Laramie forms to the base of the Wasatch (Bitter Ci'eek Group). In these views I then concurred, as will appear by referring to Chapter III of the report cited, but I have since regarded the Laramie as beginning where the distinctively marine forms cease and ending where the brackish water forms cease. It will thus be seen that the unconformity which wo referred to (Zoo. cit. ) as existing between the Laramie and the Wasatch groups really occurs within the Laramie. For my observations on the conformity of the Wasatch upon the Laramie, see Tenth Annual Report of the United States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories, page 33; Eleventh Report, pages 210 and 223 ; and Twelfth Report, Part I, page 53.
3 See report of the Geological Survey of the Fortieth Parallel, Volume I, page 553; Volume II, page 201.
(401)

14 LAEAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FEESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL. 34.
would yet be found to have continued their existence into the Wasatch epoch.1
This tentative opinion not having been then confirmed l?y known facts, I considered the few species I had recognized among the collections from Utah and Southern Wyoming as being identical with certain forms from the Laramie strata of the Upper Missouri Eiver region to belong to the upper part of the Laramie beds in that more southern region. This idea of a definite restriction of the upward range of all the Laramie species seemed to be supported by Professor Cope's discovery in New Mexico* in strata holding an intermediate position between well recognized Laramie strata beneath and equally well recognized Wasatch strata above, of a vertebrate fauna which is distinctly different from that of either of those groups. According to Professor Cope,2 so different is this vertebrate fauna from the faunas which preceded and those which followed it that he has separated the strata containing it as a distinct group under the name of the Puerco Group. At the typical localities of this group in New Mexico and Southern Colorado he recognizes the strata containing the Puerco fauna as having distinguishing stratigraphical characteristics. Dr. F. M. Endlich 3 and Mr. W. H. Holmes4 also recognized that distinction in Southern Colorado; but in other places at which the Laramie'and the Wasatch have been studied in juxtaposition, especially in Utah and Southern Wyoming, the Puerco Group has not hitherto been recognized either by stratigraphical or by paleontological characteristics. Professor Cope gives the maximum thickness of the Puerco beds in New Mexico as about 850 feet. With this estimate Mr. Holmes essentially agrees, but Dr. Endlich estimates their thickness at something more than this in Southern Colorado. All three of these authors agree, however, that the Puerco .beds are
conformable with the Laramie beneath and with the Wasatch above; and they all, when those beds were first discovered, regarded them as a part of the Wasatch Group.
As has been already intimated, it is now known that within an area which comprises a large part of the Territory of Utah not only is there a true conformity of the Wasatch upon the Laramie, but several of the characteristic molluscan species of the Laramie Group pass up into the Wasatch strata and there become members of the purely freshwater fauna of that group. In all the region where this intimate stratigraphical and paleontological relation of the Wasatch to the Laramie
'Twelfth Annual Report of the United States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories, pp. 51 and 52.
* For a'concise statement concerning the Puerco Group and its vertebrate fauna by Professor Cope, see American Naturalise, Volume XIX, p. 985. For important references to its vertebrate fauna by him, see the same Volume, pp. 385 and 493.
3 Niuth Annual Report United States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories for 1875, p. 189.
* Ibid., pp. 243 and 248.
(402)

WUITK.I

GENERAL REMAKKS.

15

was observed the character of none of the strata of either the Laramie or the Wasatch was such as to suggest the propriety of separating them from either or both of those formations as a distinct group or even as a subordinate division. That is, I observed nothing in the character of these strata which suggested to me the presence in that region of the Puerco Group of Cope. Having received from Professor Cope a small collection of fresh-water and land shells which he obtained from typical Puerco strata near the town of Nacimiento, K Mex., and which are figured on Plate I, special search was made for like forms in the Utah strata just referred to, but with the exception of the somewhat satisfactory identification of the Puerco Unio with U. rectoidcs of the Wasatch strata near the town of Wales, this search was without material success. The probabilities are that the lower portion of the Wa-
satch series in that part of Utah represents the Puerco Group of Cope j but because of the now known range of inolluscan species from the Laramie into the Wasatch Group, the actual identification of such species alone in both the Wasatch and the Puerco would not serve to fix the Puerco horizon in the Utah region with precision. That is, the facts at present known seem, plainly to indicate that while the Puerco fossils which have been published by Professor Cope indicate a distinct epoch in the history of North American vertebrate life, neither the stratigraphy nor the remains of inolluscan life, so far as it is now known, give any corresponding indication of either physical or faunal changes.
For the present, therefore, while I do not hesitate to recognize the Puerco epoch as it is indicated by the vertebrate fauna which Professor Cope has published, I am not able to recognize the existence of a distinct group of strata representing that epoch in the region which I have examined ; that is, I admit that a record of the Puerco epoch has been
made in the history of vertebrate life, but not in that of aqueous invertebrate life, nor, except locally, in the stratigraphical series.
The species which have been found to pass from the Laramie into the Wasatch are figured and described, together with others, on followingpages of this bulletin. Such a perpetuation of specific forms of gillbearing mollusks seems to make it necessary to infer that there was an unbroken continuity of aqueous habitat and also continuous sedimentation from the Laramie to the Wasatch Group. The condition of the strata in that part of Utah which I have recently examined also favors the inference as to the continuity of sedimentation. The area within which this blending of the Laramie with the Wasatch took place, although large, is evidently much smaller than that over which the blending of the marine Cretaceous strata (not its fauna) with those of the Laramie has been observed.
The strata which indicate the intimate relation of the Laramie with the Wasatch are much disturbed in that district and the difficulty of tracing their succession is largely increased by the presence of surface debris and vegetation uppn the mountain slopes. Still, this succession.
(403)

16 LARAMIE MOLLUSC AN AND FEESH-WATER EOCENE. inuu.34.
was traced with a good degree of satisfaction in the canons upon the eastern face of the Wasatch Eange in Emery and San Pete Counties, Utah. Beginning with the bluish marls of the Colorado Group in Castle Valley I traced the successive strata without a break, as I think, through the Fox Hills and Laramie Groups into and through the Wasatch Group. In addition to this is the well-known intimate relation of the three groups of Eocene fresh-water deposits .with each other, namely, the Wasatch, the Green Eiver, and the Bridger, especially in the Green Eiver Basin north of the Uinta Mountains. That is to say, certain species of mollusks range through these three groups, which are everywhere conformable, and it is evident that sedimentation was continuous through the whole series.
We seem, then, to have conclusive proof that there is a complete and unbroken stratigraphical series in that western region, extending from the Middle Cretaceous to the top of the Eocene, and aggregating nearly or quite two miles in thickness. A remarkable fact connected with the production of this great series is that, while sedimentation was evidently not materially interrupted in at least a large part of the area within which those deposits are now found, the aqueous life was changed first from that of a purely marine character to that of alternating brackish and fresh waters, and finally to that of a purely fresh-water character ; that is, the waters in which this series of strata were deposited were first marine, then alternating brackish and fresh, and finally wholly fresh. This, of course, implies the occurrence of great physical changes upon the North American continent during the Cretaceous and Eocene periods, which, however, did not interrupt sedimentation in a large part of its interior.
The inability of geologists to fix upon a definite plane of demarkation which shall separate the uppermost of the marine Cretaceous strata
from those of the Laramie Group has been referred to and is well known. It is now also known that a similar state of things really obtains within a large part of the Territory of Utah with regard to the strata of the Laramie and the Wasatch groups; and it is not strange that strata upon the confines of each of these groups, and containing an identical fauna, sbould have been sometimes referred to one and sometimes to the other group before the fauna had been recognized as identical. So far from there being an abrupt faunal break between the Laramie and the Wasatch groups, as was formerly supposed, it is now known that the faunal relation between the two groups is more intimate than that between the Laramie and the marine Cretaceous, for no species are yet known to have passed from the latter up into the Laramie.
The fact of the survival into the Wasatch epoch of several freshwater molluscan species which have hitherto been regarded as belonging exclusively to the Laramie naturally leads us to inquire whether tbe upper portion of the Laramie series in the Upper Missouri Eiver region and elsewhere may not be as properly referred $o the Wasatch as,
(404)

WHIM.]

GENERAL REMARKS.

17

to the Laramie. Applying the rule for the determination of the upper limit of the Laramie Group which I have designated on a previous page, it appears probable that at least the upper portion of the series of strata which are exposed in the vicinity of Fort Union, near the mouth of Yellowstone Eiver, should be referred to the Wasatch Group. That the lower portion of the series known as the Fort Union beds belongs to the Laramie Group cannot be doubted, because of the presence there of characteristic dinosaurian and other vertebrate remains; but there is evidently no break in that series of strata which should separate them as two formations. In the upper part of the series, however, only fresh water molluscan forms have been found, if we except one species of Corbuld, and this is understood to have come from a comparatively low horizon. Moreover, several of the same species of mollusks which are found in the Fort Union series of Laramie strata are

also found in the Wasatch strata of Utah. This .suggestion of the intimate relation of the Laramie of the Upper
Missouri Eiver region to the fresh-water Eocene series is apparently supported by the discovery of some fresh-water beds on the top of Sentinel Butte, in that region. These beds are connected with the Laramie strata beneath by direct continuity, and I have suggested that they probably represent the Green Eiver Group.1
Before closing these remarks, it is thought desirable to state concisely the grounds for my conclusion that the strata in the western portion of our national domain form one uninterrupted series from the low-
est of the marine Cretaceous formations to the top of the Bridger Group, the uppermost of the fresh-water Eocene series, inclusive. These reasons fall under two separate categories, the one based upon observed stratigraphical conditions and the other upon the character and distribution of the fossil contents of the respective groups of strata.
The stratigraphical conditions which indicate continuous sedimentation from one group or formation to the next succeeding one in this great series are, first, conformity, and second, absence of abrupt change in the character or composition of the material deposited. That is, although there are numerous instances of unconformity within the vertical range of the great series in question, especially above the distinctively marine Cretaceous strata, that unconformity in no case involves the whole of any formation of the series. In other words, where unconformity between any two formations, or any two portions of the same formation, is apparent at any one locality, perfect conformity is to be found at some other localities. The greatest and most complete unconformity in the great series has hitherto been understood to exist between the Laramie and the Wasatch groups; but it is now known that at even this horizon there is perfect conformity within a great area which includes a large part of the Territory of Utah. This area has doubtless been

1 Americaa Journal of Science, third series, Vol. XXV, pp. 411-414.

Bull. 34 2

(405)

18 LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL. 34.
materially reduced, because the strata have been so much displaced and eroded.
The paleontological evidence of the unbroken continuity of the series of formations in question consists mainly in the known passage of cer. tain species of fossils from one formation up into the next. That some of the species which existed in and about the estuaries of the marine waters in which the Cretaceous formations were deposited survived in the brackish waters of the Laramie sea is probable, but it has not yet been demonstrated by the specific identification of any such fossils in the Laramie strata. That certain species of molluscan fossils range through all three of the purely fresh-water Eocene Groups has long been known, and it is now also known that there is a similar range of a considerable number of fresh-water species of the Laramie period which coexisted with its brackish water forms, up into the Wasatch Group. This demonstrates the faunal continuity of the series from the base of the Laramie to the top of the Bridger Group. The passage of these fresh-water species from one group to another is understood to indicate that there must have been a continuity of congenial habitat from the one epoch to the other. If that habitat was not continuously lacustrine, the only way in which it is thought possible that any of the fresh-water species in question co'uld have survived was by escaping into fluviatile waters from their original lacustrine habitat and returning to a similar one subsequently established on the same ground. The character of the deposits in which these fossils are found indicates that sedimentation was continuous from the Laramie to the Wasatch, and an aqueous habitat was therefore continuous from the one epoch to the other. The survival into the latter epoch of certain species which flourished in the former one shows that that habitat was continuously a congenial one to them. This conclusion, of course, implies that the individuals of those surviving species whose
remains are found in the upper formation were direct lineal descendants of those in the lower. There appear to be only two alternatives to this conclusion, first, that the species have been incorrectly identified, or, second, that they were reintroduced after they had once become extinct. In the light of modern zoology the latter proposition is not thought to demand serious consideration. As to the former, it can only be said that the specific determinations in those cases have been made with as much confidence in their accuracy as may reasonably attend any work of that kind.
In connection with this statement of the grounds upon which are based the opinions advanced in the foregoing pages, it is proper to make some remarks upon the estimated value of fossils of fresh-water origin in geological determinations. As fossil mollusca are the principal forms which characterize fresh-water deposits, they alone will now be referred to. The differentiation of the mollusca into generic, family, and ordinal groups, and the diversification of specific forms among these groups, are immensely greater in marine waters than in any other. In brackish
(406)

WHITE.]

GENERAL REMARKS.

19

waters it is much less than in the open marine, and in lacustrine waters the minimum of differentiation is found. The large collections of fossil mollusca which have been made in different parts of the world indicate that this slight tendency to differentiation among fresh-water mollusca has always obtained in past geological time; also, that types once established have persisted through a long series of geological periods. Therefore it has become known that fossils of fresh-water origin are of little value, compared with those of marine origin, as indices of the true geological age of the strata containing them. In consequence of this, the real value of fresh-water fossils as aids in the study of strati graphical geology has been underestimated. While it is admitted that these fresh-Avater forms are of little value in determining the geological age of strata, they are really of as great importance in the study of local,
and even of continental, geology as are any other fossils. Indeed, it
would be quite impracticable to ascertain whether the waters in which formations have been deposited were marine, brackish, or fresh, except by the character of the contained fossils.
Fresh-water formations of considerable extent can only be produced upon continental areas, and they consequently record phases of continental history of which marine formations give no indication. In Western North America the fresh-water deposits rival in extent and thickness the great marine formations; and it would have been impossible to arrive at the knowledge of them which we have now attained except by a study of their fossils. Each of these great lacustrine formations has its own distinguishing fauna, the uniform character of which .over great areas is quite remarkable. So large has been the area of some of the fresh-water seas in which these deposits were formed, and so uniform the conditions under which they existed, that the geographical distribution of species in them has been nearly or quite as great as the average of that of marine mollusca. For example, some of the species of the Laramie Group have been found at points more than a thousand miles apart; and in the fresh-water Eocene groups the molluscan fauna is practically identical at points as much as 200 miles apart.
In view of the above indicated estimate of the value of fossils of freshwater origin in the study of the geology of great continental areas, I have not hesitated to use them with confidence in the foregoing discussions.
(407)

20 LAKAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FKESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL. 34.

DESCRIPTION OE SPECIES-MOLLUSCA.

UNIONID^.
Genus UNIO Betzius.

i

UNIO MENDAX White.

(Plate IV, Figs, 2, 3, and 4.)

Unio vetuatus (Meek) White, 1876; Keport upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, Vol. IV, p. 206, pi. xxi.'fig. 12, a, I, c, d.
Unio mendax White, 1877; Bulletin of the United States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories, Vol. Ill, p. 605.
Unio mendax White, 1883; Third Annual Report United States Geological Survey, 1881-'82, p. 433, pi. 18, figs. 3, 4, 5.

Shell of medium size, subelliptical in marginal outline; valves moderately gibbons, the postero-dorsal portion of each valve more or less flattened, and in the case of the examples which are regarded as females there is a slightly increased convexity of the median portion; test somewhat thin; beaks situated near the front, inconspicuous, and only slightly elevated above the hinge line; the umbones scarcely differing in their convexity from that of the adjacent portion of the valves; anterior margin rounded by a somewhat regularly diminishing curve to the basal margin; the convexity of the latter margin sometimes slight and sometimes considerable, the difference being probably due to sex; dorsal margin nearly straight or slightly convex; posterior margin sloping downward and backward from the dorsal margin to the posterobasal extremity, which is narrowly rounded to the basal margin. Surface marked by the ordinary lines of growth. Numerous small wrinkles
are usually visible upon the beaks; and two sharply-raised lines radiate
from the beak upon the postero-dorsal portion of each valve. The test being somewhat light the hinge is also more delicate than is usual with shells of Unio of equal size, but the lateral and cardinal teeth are those
of true Unio. Length of an adult example, which is probably a female, 64mm ; height,
39mm. The proportionate Jength of males is apparently a little more. This species was first described by me in Volume IV, Report upon
United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian (loc. cit.), and erroneously referred to the U. vetustus of Meek. The types of Meek's species came from the Bear Eiver Laramie, while the specimens of this species came from the Wasatch strata near Wales, Utah. The specimens which I then figured and described are probably males, and their proportions differ a little from those of the specimens figured in this bulletin. These figures are copied from plate 18 of the Third Annual Keport of the U. S. Geological Survey.
This is one of the plain oval types of Unio which has been so common in that great genus from the Jurassic period to the present time,
(408)

UNIONJ.DJ5 AND CYRF^ID/TC.

21

Indeed, it is closely like the U. nucalis of Meek and Hayden, which they

published as coming from the Jurassic rocks in the vicinity of the Black

Hills.

Locality and position. This species has hitherto been collected only

at the Desolation Canon and Wales localities, in Utah, but it is likely

to be found at any locality of the Wasatch Group in that region. Its

vertical range wafc found to be more than 1,000 feet at the Wales

locality.

UNIO RECTOIDES (sp. nov.).

(Plate IV, Fig. 1; and Plate V, Figs. 1 and 2.)
Shell transversely elongate, subelliptical in marginal outline ; front margin regularly rounded; basal margin broadly convex; postero-dorsal margin sloping downward and backward to the postero-basal extremity,
which is narrowly rounded to the base; beaks situated at about onequarter of the length of the shell from the front, incurved; umbones prominent, elevated above the hinge line. Surface plain.
Length, 90mm ; height, 47mm. This form was found associated with U. mendax at the Wales locality. While the range of variation is doubtless great in all species of Unio, there seems to be too much difference between the form above described and U. mendax to allow them to be referred to the same species. The principal differences are the greater proportionate length of U. rectoides, the prominence of its umbones, and the greater distance of the beaks from the front. This fossil form bears some resemblance to the living U. rectus Lamarck. Locality and position. The specimen figured on Plate IV, together with some other less perfect examples, was obtained at the Wales locality. A fragment which is figured on Plate V, and which probably belongs to this species, was obtained by Professor Cope from his Puerco Group near the town of Nacimiento, New Mexico.

CYRENID^E.
Genus SPH^BEIUM Scopoli.
SPH^ERIUM FORMOSUM Meek and Hayden.
(Plate IV, Figs. 5 and 6.)
Cycla* formosa M. and H. Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Phila., for 1856, p. 11C.
Sphcwium formosum M. and H. Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Phila., for 1860, p. 185.
Splicerium, formosum Meek, 1876. Report of the United States Geological Survey of the Territories, Vol. IX, p. 526, pi. 43, fig. 4, a, I, c.
Splicerium formosum White, 1883. Third Annual Report of United States Geological Survey, p. 539, pi. 17, fig. 11.
In the Wasatch strata, at the locality near Wales, Utah, some examples of a Sylicerinm were found which appear to be identical with
(409) '

22 LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL. 34.
the S.formosum of Meek and Hayden, the type specimens of which were obtained from the Fort Union Laramie strata. The best one of the specimens which were found at the Wales locality is represented by Figure 6 on Plate 1Y! Figure 5 on the same plate represents the type specimen of Meek and Hayden, it being a copy of their original fiure.
Genus LIM1JL3EA Lamarck.
(Plate II, Fig. 13.)
A single imperfect example was found at the Wales locality, which evidently belongs to the genus Lirnnsea and the general aspect of which is like that of the living species, L. columella. No species of Limncea is yet known from either the Laramie or the Wasatch Group to which this form can be properly referred; but it is possible that it is only a variety of the L. similis of Meek, from the Bridger Group of Southern Wyoming. The specimen is too imperfect to allow of a satisfactory specific description.
Subgenus LEPTOLIMNJEA Swainson.
LlMNJEA (LEPTOLIMN^EA) MINTISCULA White.
(Plate II, Figs. 10, 11, 12.)
lAmncea (L&ptolimncea) minuseula White, 1880 ; Proceedings of the United States National Museum, Vol. Ill, p. 160.
Limncea (Lqptolimna&a) minuscula White, 1883; Third Annual Report United States Geological Survey, p. 446, pi. 29, figs. 24 and 25.
Some imperfect examples, one of which is figured on Plate II, were found among the other fossils in the Wasatch strata at the Wales locality, which appear to belong to L. (L.) minuscula White. The type specimens of this species were found in strata upon the confines of the Wasatch and Green Eiver Groups in Southern Wyoming. Figure 10 on Plate II represents one of the examples found at the Wales locality; and Figures 11 and 12 represent one of the type specimens.
Genus ACELLA Haldeman. .
AOELLA MICRONEMA (sp. nOV.).
(Platell, Fig. 14.)
Among the fossils which were1 collected from the Wasatch strata at the Wales locality are several fragments of a small limnseid which is

WHITK.]

LIMN.EID.a3.

23

i
referable to the genus Acella. These fragments are sufficient to give a

good idea of the outline and general character of the shell, but none of

them are sufficiently perfect to be figured satisfactorily. I have there-

fore prepared an outline which is understood to represent the general

aspect of the species, and which is given on Plate II, Fig. 14. Tho §ur-

face is marked by fine, distinct, uniform lines, the direction of which

corresponds with the lines of growth of the shell and approximately

also with its axis.

The length of adult shells was apparently from 10 to 12 millimeters.

This shell is perhaps specifically identical with the form which I found

associated with the preceding species in strata near the junction of the

Wasatch and Green Eiver Groups iii Southern Wyoming. It is men-

tioned but not described on page 160, Volume III, of the Proceedings of

the United States National Museum,

Genus PLANOEBIS Miiller.
PLANORBIS CONVOLUTUS Meek and Hayden.
(Plate II, Fig. 15.)
PlanorUs convolutus M. and H., 1876; Report of the United States Geological Survey of the Territories, Vol. IX, p. 536, pi. 42, figs. 11 and 12.
PlanorUs convolutus White, 1883 ; Third Annual Report United States Geological Sur' vey, p. 447, pi. 27, fig. 16.
Some imperfect examples of a species of PlanorMs were found among the other Wasatch mollusca at the Wales locality which do not seem to differ specifically from P. convolutus Meek and Hayden. The type specimens of P. convolutus came from the Laramie strata of the Upper Missouri Eiver region; and these Wasatch specimens agree with them so closely that they cannot be regarded as-anything more than a variety. A few fragments of a Planorbis were also found in the Wasatch strata near Evanston, Wyo., which probably belong to this species.
4
Subgenus GYRAULUS Agassiz. .
PLANORBIS (GYRAULUS) MILITARIS White.
(Plato II, Figs. 16 and 17.)
PlanorUs (Gyraiilus) militaris White, 1880; Proceedings of the National Museum, Vol. Ill, p. 159.
PlanorUs (Gyraulus) militaris White, 1883; Third Annual Report United States Geological Survey, p.-447, pi. 28, figs. 10 and 11.
The type specimens of this species came from near the headwaters of Soldier's Fork, Utah County, Utah, the strata.containing them being a portion of the Wasatch Group. Some imperfect examples were obtained at the Wales locality. The species has also been recognized in strata upon the confines of the Green Eiver and Wasatch Groups in

24 LAEAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. [BOLT*34
Southern Wyoming. The figures on Plate II are copies of the original figures which were published in the work last above cited.
PHYSID^E.
Genus PHYSA Draparnaud.
PHTSA PLEROMATIS White.
(Plate III, Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.)
Physa pleromaiis White, 1875; Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, Vol. IV, p. 211, pi. xxi, fig. 1, a, &.
Physa pleromaiis White, 1883 ; Third Annual Report United States Geological Survey, p. 450, pi. 30, figs. 6, 7, 8.
The original specimens of this species came from Wasatch strata in Utah which are equivalent with those at the Wales locality, where numerous examples were also obtained. Specimens of this species are likewise often met with in the Wasatch strata north of the Uinta Mountains, in which region it" also extends up into the base of the Green Eiver Group.
The specimens which were collected at the Wales locality, as well as those collected elsewhere, show great variation as to form and proportions. So great is this range of variation that in the absence of intermediate forms no one would hesitate to refer the specimens showing the two extremes of variation to different species. The specimens illustrated on Plate III show much variation, but not the full extremes, especially as shown in the young.
PHTSA KANABENSIS White.
(Plate III, Figs. 11,12, and 13.)
Physa Jcanabensis White, 1876; Report upon the Geology of the Uinta Mountains, by J. W. Powell, p. 119.
The original specimens of PJiysa Jcanabensis were obtained by Major Powell from strata in Southern Utah which he then regarded as belonging to the Lararnie (Point of Eocks) Group. These were described by me (loo. cit.), but the specimens were too imperfect to be satisfactorily figured. Several imperfect examples of a form which probably belongs to the same species were found in the Wasatch strata at the Wales locality, already often mentioned. These specimens show that the last volution was proportionally much more inflated than the others. Theoriginal specimens of P. Icanabensis did not show this, but it is probable that they were not fully adult. Figs. 11 and 12 represent two imperfect examples from the Wales locality and Fig. 13 is a restored outline of the full adult shell.
(412)

WFTTTR.]

PHYSID2E.

25

PHYSA BTJLLATA (sp. nov.).

(Plate III, Figs. 14, 15, 16, and 17?.)
Shell small, ovoid; volutions four or five in number, the last one large and ventricose; spire small and short, forming only a small part of the length of the shell. Surface marked by the usual lines of growth.
Length of one of the largest examples, 15mm ; greatest breadth, of the same* 10mm.
This species is closely like the living P. bullata Gould, but it seems to differ from that and from other fossil forms too much to justify its reference to any published species. A considerable number of examples of this form were collected which show a good degree of varition. The last volution of some of the specimens is much expanded, making the aperture very broad, but in other examples the expansion
is less. The length of the spire is also variable, but it is short in all cases.
Locality and position. Wasafcch strata, near Wales, Utah; and also at several other localities in equivalent strata in the Wasatch Mountains, east of Sa,n Pete Valley.

Genus BULINUS Miiller.
BULINUS ATAVTJS White?
(Plato III, Figs. 7, 8, 9, and 10.)
B-iiMnus alamis White, 1877; Bulletin UnitecV States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories, Vol. Ill, p. 601.
Bulinus atavus White, 1880; Twelfth Annual Report of the United States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories, Part I, p. 86, pi. 24, fig. 5, a, &.
Bulinus atavus White, 1883; Third Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, p. 450, pi. 25, figs. 6 and 7.
Among the fossils collected from the Wasatch. strata at the Wales locality in Utah are some examples which are closely like, if not identical with, the form which I described (loc. cit.) under the name of Bulinus atavus. The Utah specimens are not quite perfect, but so far as they exhibit their specific characters they seem to differ from the type specimens only in being of smaller size. The type specimens were collected by Professor Cope from the Judith Kiver Laramie beds in Montana.
Among the Physidsa which were collected from the Wasatch strata at the Wales locality in Utah are some more or less imperfect examples which do not seem to be referable to any of the preceding species. Some of these closely resemble the Bulinus subelongatus of Meek and Hayden, the types of which they obtained from the Laramie strata at the mouth of Judith River, Montana. Some fragments found in the Wasatch. strata near Evauston, Southwestern Wyoming, appear also to belong fa the last-uained species.
(413) '

26 LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL.34.
ANCYLID^E.
Genus ACEOLOXUS Beck.
ACROLOXUS ACTINOPHORUS (sp. UOV.).
(Plate II, Fig. 22.)
Shell small, elongate, subelliptical in marginal outline, somewhat wider in front than behind; apex situated at a little more than onequarter of*the full length of the shell from the posterior end. Surface marked by the ordinary lines of growth, which are crossed by a multitude of minute radiating lines, the latter being visible only under a lens.
Length, 4mm ; breadth, 3mm. This form is possibly identical with the A. minutus of Meek and Hayden, from the Laramie strata at Fort Union, Mont. It seems to differ specifically from that form, however, in possessing the finely radiate markings of the surface and in being proportionally longer. Locality and position. Wasatch strata near the town of Wales, Utah.
HELICIDJE.
Genus HELIX Linnaeus.
HELIX NACIMIENTENSIS (sp. nov.).
(Plate V, Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7.)
Shell large, nmbilicate; volutions six or seven in number, broadly convex upon the upper side, increasing regularly in width, but the depth is somewhat rapidly increased adjacent to the umbilicus upon the maturity of the shell; the periphery of the shell somewhat sharply angular in the earlier stages of growth, but it is obtusely or even obscurely so in its later stages; spire convex; apex obtuse; under surface of the last volution broadly convex from the periphery to the border of the umbilicus, which is abruptly rounded; outline of the aperture approximately semi-lunar, obtusely angular both above and below; the outer lip is apparently neither thickened nor reflexed.
Greatest diameter of the largest example in the collection, 42 m ; height, 33 mm.
This species is related to H. peripheria White, but it is a much larger shell, and the peripheral angle is much sharper in specimens of equal size than it is in H. peripheria.
Locality and position. Puerco strata, near the town of Nacimiento, N. Mex., where it was collected by Professor Cope.
(414)

WHITE.]

HELICID^E AND PUPIM.

27

HELIX ADIPIS (sp. nov.).

(Plate V, Figs. 11 and 12.)

Shell small; spire moderately elevated; umbilicus not very broad;
outer lip apparently slightly reflexed, but not materially thickened. The surface marked by regular transverse raised lines, corresponding in direction w,ith the lines of growth.
Height, 3 mm ; diameter, 5 mm. Only two examples of this little shell were obtained, and it is possible that they are immature, but they appear to be adult. Jnaaspect this species resembles R. evanstonensis White, from the Wasatch beds near Evanston, Wyo.,but that shell is larger and has its umbilicus closed. Locality and position. Puerco Group, near the town of Nacimiento, N.'Mex.j where it vwas obtained by Professor Cope, who found it associated with both the preceding and the following species:

PUPID^E.
Genus PUPA Lamarck.
PUPA LEiDYr Meek ?
(Plate V, Figs. 8, 9, and 10.)
Pupa 9 leidyi Meek, 1873; Sixth Annual Eeport of the United States Geological Survey of the Territories [for 1872], p. 517.
Associated with the preceding species, and among the few shells collected by Professor Cope from his Puerco Group near the town of Nacimiento, N. Mex., are some specimens which seem to be specifically identical with Pupa leidyi Meek. I have never been able to find Meek's type of P. leidyi among the collections of the National Museurr., and I am therefore obliged to rely upon his description alone. This description agrees too closely with the specimens from New Mexico to justify their reference to any other species except upon the ground that they come from different horizons. Meek's types came from the top of the Green Biver Group or from the base of the Bridger, while the New Mexican specimens come from a horizon which is apparently 4,000 or 5,000 feet lower.
I have shown on a previous page of this bulletin that the fresh-water series of strata is complete from the Laramie Group to the Bridger, inclusive ; and there seems, therefore, to be no good reason to doubt that this niolluscau form lived continuously through the whole time in which those formations were deposited.
(415)

28 LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. fnuu,34.
CERIPHASIID/E.
Genus GONIOBASIS Lea.
GONIOBASIS TENUICARINATA Meek and Hayden.
(Plate II, Figs. 6, 7, 8, and 9.)
Melania tenuicarinata M. and H.; Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Phila., for 1857, p. 137.
Goniobasis tenuicarinata M. and H., 1876; Report on the United States Geological Survey of the Territories, Vol. IX, p. 566, pi. 43, fig. 14, a, b, c.
Goniobasis tenuicarinata White, 1875; Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, Vol. IV, p. 212, pi. xxi, fig. 10, a, b, c.
Goniobasis tenuicarinata White, 1883; Third Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, p. 463, pi. 26, fig. 11.
This is'one of the best known of the gasteropods of the Laramie Group, it having been found at different localities in Montana and Colorado; and it was formerly supposed to be confined to that group. The type specimens of Meek and Hayden came from the Laramie strata near Fort Union, Mont.; and the specimens which I figured in. Volume IV, Explorations and Surveys (loc. cit.), came from the Wasatch strata at the Wales locality in Utah, as did also those represented by Figs. 6, 7, and 8, Plate II, of this bulletin. A large number of specimens have been obtained from the Wales locality which, while they vary considerably among themselves, possess all the essential characteristics of the species. Indeed, there seems to be no reason to doubt that these Wasatch specimens are in all respects specifically identical with those which have been obtained from undoubted Laramie strata.
GONIOBASIS NEBRASCENSIS Meek and Hayden.
(Plate II, Figs. 4 and 5.)
Melania nebrascensis M. and H.; Proceedings Academy Natural Sciences, Phila., for 1856, p. 124.
Goniobasis nebrascensis M. and H., 1876; Report of the United States Geological Survey of the Territories, Vol. IX, p. 565, pi. 43, fig. 12, a, I, c, d, e, f.
Goniobasis nebrascensis White, 1875; Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, Vol. IV, p. 213, pi. xxi, fig. 9, a, b, c.
Goniobasis nebrascensis White, 1883; Third Annual Report United States Geological Survey, p. 463, pi. 26, figs. 15 and 16.
This species is a very variable one, and it seems to have been in part confounded with another similar form which occurs in the Laramie strata of Montana. The specimen represented by the figures on plate 26 of the work last above cited is especially referred to. Those copied figures are still more widely different from what I regard as the typical form of
(416)

WUITJJ.]

CERIPHASIID^E.

29

G. nebrascensis by the failure of the artist to add the revolving lines which appear in Meek's Original figures of the specimen. The specimens which were found at the Wales locality many years ago by Mr. G. K. Gilbert were pronounced by Mr. Meek, who then saw them, to be identical with G. nebrascensis. The near relationship of G. nebrascensis with G. tenuicarinata, as the two forms occur in the Wasatch strata of Utah, is quite apparent; but the difference is constant, and.the two forms were not there found associated in the same layers. The form here referred to G. nebrascensis has also been recognized among collections which have been made from Wasatch strata near Evanston, Wyo., and in Desolation Canon, Utah.

GONIOBASIS TENERA Hall.
(PlateII, Figs, land2.)
Cerithiwm ten&rum Hall, 1845 ; Exploring Expedition Oregon and Northern California (Fre"mont), p. 308, pi. ill, fig. 6.
Goniobasis tcnera White, 1875; Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, Vol. IV, p. 212, pi. xxi, fig. 11, a, I, c.
Goniobasis tcnera White, 1883; Third Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, p. 464, pi. 31.
This species is one'of the most common forms in the fresh-water Eocene strata of the West, and it ranges from the Wasatch Group to theBridger Group inclusive. It varies so greatly in its surface markings, and also in size, that no less than five specific names have by different authors been given to forms all of which I now regard as belonging to this species. Examples of all these varieties are figured on plate 31 of the work last above cited, so arranged as to show a gradation from nearly plain to highly ornamented examples. Some imperfect examples of the typical variety tenera were found, near the top of the series exposed at the Wales locality.

GONIOBASIS FILIFERA (sp. nov.).
(Platell, Fig. 3.)
Some imperfect examples of a species of Goniobasis were found at the Wales locality, in Utah, associated with G. tenuicarinata and others of the forms which are described on previous pages, which evidently belong to an unpublished species. The shell is rather small, slender; the volutions convex and marked by three or more revolving raised lines, similar to those which mark the volutions of G. tenuicarinata. The revolving lines are only two in number in one of the examples and in another there seems to be only one. No indication of longitudinal folds, such as mark G. tenera, nor of fine revolving striae, such as appear upon Q. tenuicarinata, between the carinse, have been observed.
(417)

30 LARAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FRESH-WATER EOCENE. [BULL.34.

RISSOID^E.
Genus HYDBOBIA Hartinann.
HYDEOBIA RECTA White.
(Plate II, Fig. 21.)
HydroMa recta White, 1876; Geological Keport of the Uinta Mountains by J.W. Powell, p. 132.
HydroMa recta White, 1883; Third Annual Keport of the United States Geological Survey, p. 466, pi. 27, fig.'38.
The original specimens of this species were obtained from the coalbearing Wasatch strata,near Evanston,Southwestern WyoiniDg. Numerous imperfect examples were also found at the Wales locality, in layers associated with the coal, and also in other layers several hundred feet above the coal. These specimens were all crushed by pressure of the strata, and are otherwise imperfect, but they seem to be specifically identical with the type specimens. The latter are also imperfect. They are represented on Plate II of this bulletin.
In view of the purely- fresh-water molluscan types with which these shells have been found associated there is reason to doubt whether the species ought to be referred to the genus Hydrobia. Perhaps it might with better reason be referred to Bythinella or to Paludistrina.

HYDEOBIA UTAHENSIS White.

(Plate II, Fig. 20.)

HydroMa utahensis White, 1876; Geological Report Uiiita Mountains, J. W. Powell,

p. 132.

HydroMa utahcnsis White, 1883;' Third Annual Report of the United States Geologi-

cal Survey, p. 466, pi. 27, fig. 35.

.

The type specimens of this species came from the Wasatch strata at the west base of Musiuia Mountain, San Pete County, Utah. It was also found in equivalent strata at the Wales locality; but the latter specimens are not well preserved. Copies of the original figures are given on Plate II of this bulletin.
In view of the close faunal relationship which the Wasatch Group is now known to hold to the Laramie, it seems not improbable that Hydrobia utahensis ought to be regarded as specifically identical with H. eulimoides Meek and Hayden. The latter was obtained from the Laramie strata of the Upper Missouri Eiver region. The remarks which are made concerning the generic relations of the preceding species are also applicable to this.
(418)

WHITE.J

RISSOID^E AND VIVIPARID^E.

31

Genus MICEOPYEGUS Meek.
MICEOPYRGUS MINUTULTJS Meek and Hayden.
(Plate II, Fig. 24.)
Melania minutula M. and H.; Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Phila., for 1856, p. 123.
Micropyrr/us miuutvlns Meek, 1876; Report of the United States Geological Survey of the Territories, Vol. IX, p. 575, pi. 43, fig. 18, a, I.
Mivropyrgus minutulus White, 1883; Third Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, p. 465, pi. 26, fig. 20.
Some small shells which were found in the Wasatch strata at the Wales locality, imbedded in one of the thin limestone layers, appear to be specifically identified with Micropyrgus minutulus Meek and ,Hayden. The only apparent difference is that the Utah specimens are somewhat larger than the dimensions given by Meek and Hayden. Their type specimens came from the Fort Union Lararnie strata in Montana. The figures on Plate II are copied from Meek's original figures. They are muchen larged.
VIVIPARID^E.
Genus VIVIPAEUS Gray.
YIVIPAKUS TROCHIFORMIS Meek and Hayden.
(Plate I, Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5; conf. Figs. 6 to 13.)
Viviparus trochiformis M. and H.; Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Phila., for 1860, p. 185.
Viviparus trochiformis White, 1875; Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, Vol. IV, p. 214, pi. xxi, fig. 4, a, V, c.
Viviparus trocMformis Meek, 1876; Report of the United States Geological Survey of the Territories, Vol. IX, p. 580, pi. 44, tig. 2, a, I, c.
Viviparus IrocMformis White, 1883; Third Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, p. 467, pi. 24, figs. 10 to 16.
Compare also with V. leidyi, V. leidyi var. formosus, and V. raynoldsianus Meek and Hayden (loo. cii.), and also with V. panguitchensis White, Third Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, p. 467, pi. 25, figs. 19,20, and 21.
This species was originally described by Meek and Hayden from the Laramie strata of the Upper Missouri Eiver region. It was afterwards recognized by me among the fossils which were brought from certain strata in Utah which have since been ascertained to belong to the Wasatch group. Upon a re-examination of the collections referred to, and also a study of those which I collected during the past season at the Wales locality, I am still convinced that those Utah examples are specifically identical with the original specimens brought from Montana. Furthermore, I find in the Utah collections varietal forms which may with propriety be referred respectively to V. leidyi and V. raynoldsianus.
(419)

OZ LAKAMIE MOLLUSCAN AND FBESH-WATEK EOCENE. IDULL. 34.
Again, I find among those collections intermediate forms which seem to show that these are only varieties of V. trocMformis. Some of these varietal forms indicate that V.'panguitchensis ought also to be considered as a variety of V. trocMformis. Besides this close relationship among themselves of the forms just named, I have shown in the work last above cited the intimate relation which Tulotoma tkompsoni White holds to Viviparus trocMformis.

VlVIPAEUS NANUS (sp. nOV.).

'

(Plate II, Figs. 18 and 19.)

Viviparus ? White, 1875; Beport upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, Vol. IV, p. 215, pi. xxi, fig. 7, a, b.
Shell small, the axis short as compared with the transverse diameter; volutions five in number, regularly convex; surface plain.
Height of the largest example in the collection, 10mm ; greatest diameter, 8mm.
When this form was first noticed by me (loc. cit.) the specimens tlien obtained would not justify the application of a new specific name. During the past season, however, I collected a considerable number of nearly perfect examples, which indicate that it really belongs to an unpublished form. I have, therefore, given it a new specific name.
Locality and position. Wasatch strata, near Wales, Utah, and in equivalent strata at several localities in the Wasatch Mountains.

CRUSTACEA.

CYPRID^.

Genus CYPEIS Miiller. CYPRIS SANPETENSIS (sp. nov.).

(Plate II, Fig. 23.)

Shell obliquely oblong in marginal outline, wider behind than before; anterior margin rounded;. ventral margin straight and also a little

longer than the dorsal; posterior margin gently convex, and sloping

downward and a little backward from the dorsal to the ventral margin;

valves moderately convex, and a very slight transverse depression is

observable towards the anterior end.

'

\

Length, 2mm ; height, lmm.

Locality and position. Wasatch strata near the town of Wales,

{Jtah,

(420)

PLATE I.

Bull. 34 3

(421)

33

PLATE I.

Paga

VlVIPARUS TROCHIFORMIS AND RELATED FORMS........__.___ ............

Fig. 1. Viviparus trochiformis from the Fort Union beds; a copy of Meek's

type figure.

N

Figs. 2 and 3. Opposite views of another example, also from the Fort Union

beds.

Figs. 4 and 5. Opposite views of an example from the Wasatoh beds near

Wales, Utah. This specimen is more elongate than usual.

Figs. 6, 7, and 8. Views of each of the three types of V. panguitchenaia ; from

Southern Utah.

Fig. 9. A copy of Meek's type figure of V. leidyi.

Figs. 10 and 11. Copies of Meek's figures of V. leidyi var. formosut.

Figs. 12 and 13. Copies of Meek's figures of V. raynoldsictnua.

31

All figures on this plate are of natural size.

34 (422)

BULLETIN NO. 34 PL. 1

1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Viviparus trochir'ormis.
6, 7, 8. V. pai)j;uitckeiisi>s. 9. V. leidyi.

10,11. V. leidyi var. fonnosus. 12, 13. V. rayiioldsianus.

PLATE II.

(425)

37

PLATE II.

Page.

GONIOBASIS TENERA ........... ...^:........... ..............................
Figs. 1 and 2. Views of two typical examples; natural size. GONIOBASIS FILIFERA .......................................................
Fig. 3. View of one of the type specimens; enlarged. GONIOBASIS NEBRASCENSIS ....... ..........................;.............
Figs. 4 and 5. Views of two examples from the Wasatch beds near Wales, Utah; natural size.
GONIOBASIS TENUICARINATA ................................................ Figs. 6,7, and 8. Examples from the Wasatch strata near Wales, Utah; natural size. Fig. 9. Copies of Meek's original figures of the type specimen, from the Fort Union beds.
LiMN2BA (LEPTOLIMN^EA) MINUSCULA........................................ Fig. 10. An example from the Wasatch beds near Wales, Utah; enlarged. Figs. 11 and 12. Opposite views of the type specimen, from Southern Wyoming; enlarged.
LIMN.EA ?............................................................ Fig. 13. Lateral view of an imperfect example; natural size.
ACELLA MICRONEMA ........................................................
Fig. 14. A restored outline; enlarged. PLANORBIS CONVOLUTUS ....................................................
Fig. 15. Copies of Meek's original figures. PLANORBIS (GYRAULUS) MILITARIS ..........................................
Figs. 16 and 17. Opposite views of one of the type specimens; enlarged.

29
29 28 28
22
22
22
23 23

VlVIPARUS NANUS ..........................................................
Figs. 18 and 19. Opposite views of an adult example; enlarged.
HYDROBIATJTAHENSIS.......................................................
Fig. 20. Lateral view of the type specimen ; enlarged. HYDROBIA RECTA ...........................................................
Fig. 21. Views of the type specimens; enlarged.
ACROLOXUS ACTINOPHORUS...... ............................................
Fig. 22. Apical view of the type specimen, from the Wales locality; enlarged. The figure is a partial restoration, the specimen having been somewhat crushed.
CYPRIS SANPETENSIS........................................................ Fig. 23. Lateral view of a left valve; enlarged.
MlCROPYRGUS MINTJTULUS ..... ............................................. Fig. 24. Lateral views; enlarged. After Meek.
38 (426)

32
30
30
26
32 31

BtJLtETJN NO. 34 PL. I]

23

1, 2. Goniobasis tenera. 3. G. tilifera.
4, 5. G. nebraseensis 6, 7, 8, 9. G. tenuicarinata. 10,11,12. Limnaia (Leptoliumrca)
iiiiimscula.

13. Limnrea 14. Aoi'llii micronema.
15. Planorbis convolutus. 16,17. P. inilitai is.
18,19. Viviparus uanus.

20. Hydrobia utahensis. 21. H.'recta.
22. Acroloxus actinopborus. 2ii. Cyjiris .saiipetciisis.
24. Micropyrgus miuutulus.

PLATE III.
(429) 41

PLATE III.

PRYSA PLEROMATTS .-..-........-.--...-...-. ..--.....--....-......-...---.
Fig. 1. Lateral view of the type specimen; natural size. Figs. 2 and 3. Opposite views of another example from the Wasatch beds
near Wales, Utah; natural size. Figs. 4, 5, and 6. Lateral views of other examples from the same locality.
BULINUS ATAVUS ............................... ............................
Figs. 7 and 8. Copies of Meek's figures of the type specimens from the Judith Eiver strata; natural size.
Figs. 9 and 10. Opposite views of an example from the Wasatch beds near Wales, Utah ; apparently belonging to this species, although much smaller than the types.
PHYSA KANABENSIS? ........................................................ Fig. 11. Lateral view of a crushed and imperfect example from the Wales locality; natural size. Fig. 12. Another, fragment from the same locality. Fig. 13. A restored outline of the whole shell.
PHYSA BULLATULA ..............:..... 1...................................... Figs. 14,15, and 1(5. Lateral views c f three different examples from the Wales locality | natural size.
Fig. 17. Lateral view of an exanc pie from tlie same locality, perhaps belonging to this species.
42 (430)

24 25
24 25

. 8. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

BULLETIN NO. 34 PL. Ill

17
11

1, 2, 3,4. 5, 6. Physa pleromatis. 7, 8, 9,10. Buiinus atavus.

11, 12,13. Physa kanabensis. 14,15,16,17. P. bullutula.

PLATE IV.
45

PLATE IV.

Page.

RECTOIDBS ................................_..........1.............. 21

Fig. 1. Right side view; natural size.

UNIO MENDAX .............................................................. 20

Fig. 2. Left side view ; natural size.

Fig. 3. Right side view of a smaller example.

Fig. 4. Interior view of a portiou of a right valve.

SPH2ERIUM FORMOSUM .............................................. 1... .

21

Fig. 5. Copies of Meek's figures of the type specimen from the Fort Union

beds; natural size and enlarged.

Fig. 6. A right valve from the Wasatch strata near Wales, Utah; enlarged.

46 (434)

Q. B. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

BULLETIN NO. 34 PL. IV

1. Uuio rectoiiies.

2, 3, 4. U. mendax.

5, 6. Sphserium fonnoaum.

Bull. 34 4

(437)

49

PLATE V.

UNIO RECTOIDEST .__........................._......_.................
Figs. 1 and 2. Opposite views of a fragment of a left valve. HELIX ADIPIS..... ..........................................................

21
27

Figs. 11 and 12. Lateral and apical views of one of the type specimens; enlarged.

HELIX NACIMIENTENSI8....... ......... ............ .1.. ..................... 26

Figs. 3, 4, and 5. Upper, under, and lateral views of the largest and most

perfect example in the collection; natural size. The test is nearly all

exfoliated.

Fig. 6. Lateral view of another example, a portion of the last volution

having been distorted by pressure.

Fig. 7. An apical portion, showing the angular character of the periphery

of the earlier volutions.

PUPA LEIDYI?............................................................... 27

Figs. 8 and 9. Opposite views of a broken example, but the best one in the

collection; enlarged.

Fig. 10. Another example, crushed and imperfect.

All the/specimens figured on this plate were.collected by Professor Cope from his

Puerco Group, near the town of Nacimiento, N. Mex.

. ,.

50 (438)

BULLETIN NO 34 PL.V

1,2. Unip reetoides ? 3,4, 5, C, 7. Helix nacimientensis.

8, 9,10. Pupa leidyi ? 11,12. Helix atlipis.

INDEX.

Page.

Acella inicrouema........................................................... 22

Acroloxus actinophorus ..................................................... 26

Ancylidse................................................................... 26

Bulimia atavus ............................................................. 25

Ceriphasiidse ............................................................... 28

Cope, E. D., on the Puerco Group ........................................... 14

Crustacea.................................................................. 32

Cyrenidw................................................................... 21

Cypridffi............................................................'........ 32

Cypris sanpetensis .......................................................... 32

Description of species....................................................... 20

Endlich, F. M., quoted ...................................................... 14

General remarks ............................................................

9

Goniobasis filifera.......................................... ................ 29

Goniobasis nebrascensis ..................................................... 28

Goniobasis tenera ........................................................... 29

Goniobasis teuuicarinata.................................................... 28

Helicidse .........................................................I......... 26

Helix adipis ................................................................ 27

Helix nacimientensis........................................................ 26

Holmes, W. H., quoted...................................................... 14

Hydrobiarecta.............................................................. 30

Hydrobia utahensis......................................................... 30

Limnsea ?............................................................. 22

Limnaea (Leptolimnsea) minuscula........................................... 22

LimufeidaB.................................................................. 22

List of species............................................................... 11

Mollusca..........I........'... ............................................. 20

Micropyrgus minutulus ..................................................... 31

Physabullata............................................................... 25

Physa kanabensis........................ ................................... 24

Physa pleromatis .... ....................................................... 24

Physidse.................................................................... 24

Planorbis convolutus........................................................ 23

Planorbis (Gyraulus) militaris............................................... 23

Puerco Group............................................................... 14

Pupa leidyif................................................................ 27

Pupidse.......................... .......... ...............I................... 27

Rissoidffi.................................................................... 30

Species, description of ...................................................... 20

list and tabular view of the range of................................... 11

Sphserium formosum .............. .......................................... 21

Tabular view of the range of species......................................... 11

Unio menclax ...................... ......................................... 20

Unionidse................................................................... 20

(441)

53

54 INDEX.
Page. Unio rectoides .............................................................. 21 Viviparidse ................................................................. 31 Viviparus leidyi ............................................................ 31 Viviparus leidyi var. formosus............................................... 31 Viviparus nanus ............................................................. 32 Viviparus panguitchensis ..... r ............................................. 31 Viviparus raynoldsianus................... ................................... 31 Viviparus trochiformis .................................................. . 31
Wales.Utah ................................................................ 9
(442)

ADVERTISEMENT.
[Bulletin No. 35.]
The publications of the United States Geological Survey are issued in accordance with the statute, approved March 3,1879, which declares that
" The publications of the Geological Surrey shall consist of the annual report of operations, geological and economic maps illustrating the resources and classification of the lands, and reports upon general and economic geology and paleontology. The annual report of operations of the Geological Surrey shall accompany the annual report of the Secretary of the Interior. All special memoirs and reports of said Survey shall be issued in uniform quarto series if deemed necessary by the Director, but otherwise in ordinary octavos. Three thousand copies of each shall be published for scientific exchanges
and for sale at the price of publication; and all literary and cartographic materials received in exchange shall be the property of the United States and form a part of the library of the organization: And the money resulting from the sale of such publications shall be covered into the Treasury of the United States."
On July 7,1882, the following joint resolution, referring to all Government publications, was passed by Congress:
'' That whenever any document or report shall be ordered printed by Congress, there shall be printed, in addition to the number in each case stated, the 'usual number' (1,000) of copies for binding and distribution among those entitled to receive them."
Under these general laws it will be seen that none of the Survey publications are furnished to it for gratuitous distribution. The 3,000 copies of the Annual Report are distributed through the document rooms of Congress. The 1,900 copies of each of the publications are distributed to the officers of the legislative and executive departments and to stated depositories throughout the United States.
Except, therefore, in those cases where an extra number of any publication is specially supplied to this Office, the Survey has no copies of any of its publications for gratuitous distribution.
ANNUAL REPORTS.
Of the Annual Reports there have been already published: I. First Annual Report to the Hon. Carl Schurz, by Clarence King. 1879-'80. 8°. 79 pp. 1 map. A preliminary report describing plan of organization and publications. II. Report of the Director of the United States Geological Survey for 1880-'81, by J. W. Powell. 1882. 8°. Iv, 588 pp. 61 pi. 1 map. m. Third Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, 1881-'82, by J. "W. Powell. 1883. 8°. xviii, 564 pp. 67 pi. and maps. IV. Fourth Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, 1882-'83, by J. W. Powell. 1884. 8°. xxxii, 473 pp. 85 pi. and maps. V. Fifth Annual Report of the United States Geological Survey, 1883-'84, by J. W. Powell. 1885. 8°. xxxvi, 469 pp. 58 pi. and maps. The Sixth Annual Report is in press.
MONOGRAPHS.
Of the Monographs, Nos. n, ICC, IV, V, VI, VII, VHI, and IX are now published, viz: II. Tertiary History of the Grand Canon District, with atlas, by Clarence E. Dutton, Capi U. S. A. 1882. 4°. xiv, 264pp. 42 pi. and atlas of 24 sheets folio. Price $10.12. m. Geology of the Comstock Lode and the Washoe District, with atlas, by George F. Becker. 1882. 4°. xv, 422 pp. 7 pi. and atlas of 21 sheets folio. Price $11. IV. Comstock Mining and Miners, by Eliot Lord. 1883. 4°. xiv, 451 pp. 3 pi. Price $1.50. V. Copper-bearing Rocks of Lake Superior, by Roland D. Irving. 1883. 4°. xvi, 464 pp. 151. 29 pi. Price $1.85. VI. Contributions to the Knowledge of the Older Mesozoic Flora of Virginia, by "Wm. M. Fontaine. 1883. 4». . xi, 144 pp. 54 1. 54 pi. Price $1.05. VH. Silver-Lead Deposits of Eureka, Nevada, by Joseph S. Curtis. 1884. 4°. xiii, 200 pp. 16 pi. Price $1.20. VOT. Paleontology of the Eureka District, by Charles D. "Walcott. 1884. 4°. xiii, 298 pp. 24 1. 24 pi. Price $1.10. IX. Brachiopoda and Lamellibranchiata of the Raritan Clays and Greensand Marls of New Jersey, by Robert P. Whitfleld. 1885. 4°. xx, 338 pp. 35 pi. Price, $1.15.

ADVERTISEMENT.

The following are hi press, viz: X. Dinocerata. A Monograph of an.Extinct Order of Gigantic Mammals, by Othniel Charles Marsh. 1885. 4°. xviii, 237 pp. 56 pi. XI. Geological History of Lake Lahontan, a Quaternary Lake of Northwestern Nevada, by Israel Cook Russell. 1885. 4°. xiv, 288 pp. 46 pi. XII. Geology and Mining Industry of Leadville, with atlas, by S. F. Emmons. 1886. 4°. xxix, 77U pp. 45 pi. and 35 atlas sheets. The following are in preparation, viz: I. TJie Precious Metals, by Clarence King.
Geology of the Eureka Mining District, Nevada, with atlas, by Arnold Hague. Lake Bonneville, by G. 3L Gilbert. Sauropoda, by Prof. 0. C. Marsh. Stegosauria, by Prof. 0. C. Marsh. Geology of the, Quicksilver Deposits of the Pacific Slope, with atlas, by George F. Becker. The Penokee-Gogebic Iron-Bearing Series of North "Wisconsin and Michigan, by Roland D. Irving. Description of New Fossil Plants from the Dakota Group, by Leo Lesquereux. Younger Mesozoic Flora of Virginia, by William M. Fontaine. Report on the Denver Coal Basin, by Samuel F. Emmous. . Report on Ten-Mile Mining District, Colorado, by Samuel F. Emmons. Report on Silver Cliff Mining District, by Samuel F. Emmons. . Flora of the Dakota Group, by J. S. Newberry.

BULLETINS.

The Bulletins of the Survey will contain such papers relating to the general purpose of its work as

do not properly come underthe heads of Annual Reports or Monographs.

Each of these Bulletins contains but one paper and is complete in itself. They are, however, num-

bered in a continuous series, and may thus be united into volumes of convenient size. To facilitate

. this, each Bulletin has two paginations, one proper to itself and another which belongs to it as part of

the volume.

Of this series of Bulletins Nos. 1 to 35 are already published, viz:

1. On Hypersthene-Andesite and on Triclinic Pyroxene in Augitic Rocks, by Whitman Cross, with

a Geological Sketch of Buffalo Peaks, Colorado, by S.F. Emmons. 1883.8°. 42pp. 2 pi. Price 10 cents.

2. Gold and Silver Conversion Tables, giving the coining values of troy ounces of fine metal, etc., by

Albert "Williams, jr. 1883. 8°. -8 pp. Price 5 aents.

3. On the Fossil Faunas of the Upper Devonian, along the meridian of 76° 30', from Tompkins County,

New York, to Bradford County, Pennsylvania, by Henry S.Williams. 1884. 8°. 36pp. Price 5 cents.

4. On Mesozoic Fossils, by Charles A. White. 1884. 8°. 36 pp. 9 pi. Price 5 cents.

5. A Dictionary of Altitudes in the United States, compiled by Henry Gannett. 1884. 8°. 325 pp.

Price 20 cents.

~

6. Elevations in the Dominion of Canada, by J. "W. Spencer. 1884. 8°. 43 pp. Price 5 cents.

7. Mapoteca Geologica Americana. A catalogue of geological maps of America (North and South),

1752-1881, by Jules Marcou and John Belknap Marcou. 1884. 8°. 184 pp. Price 10 cents.

8. On Secondary Enlargements of Mineral Fragments in Certain Rocks, by R. D. Irving and C. R.

VanHise. 1884. 8°. 56pp. 6 pi. Price 10 cents.

9. A Report of work done in the Washington Laboratory during the fiscal year 1883-'84. F. W.

Clarke, chief chemist; T. M. Chatard, assistant. 1884. 8°. 40pp. Price 5 cents.

10. On the Cambrian Faunas of North America. Preliminary studies, by Charles D. Walcott. 1884.

8°. 74 pp. 10 pi. Price 5 cents.

11. On the Quaternary and Recent Mollusca of'the Great Basin; with Descriptions of New Forms, by

R. Ellsworth Call; introduced by a sketch of the Quaternary Lakes of the Great Basin, by G. K. Gil-

bert. 1884. 8°. 66 pp. 6 pi. Price 5 cents.

12. A Cryatallographic Study of the Thlnolite of Lake Lahontan, by Edward S. Dana. 1884. 8°.

34 pp. 3 pi. Price 5 cents.

13. Boundaries of the United States and of the several States and Territories, by Henry Gannett,

1885. 8°. 135 pp. Price 10 cents.

14. The Electrical and Magnetic Properties of the Iron-Carburets, by Carl Barus and Vincent

Strouhal. 1885. 8°. 238pp. Price 15 cents.

15. On the Mesozoio and Cenozoio Paleontology of California, by Charles A. White. 1885. 8°.

33 pp. Price 5 cents.

16. On the higher Devonian Faunas of Ontario County, New York, by J. M. Clarke. 1885. 8°.

86 pp. 3 pi. Price 5 cents.

. 17. On the Development of Crystallization in the Igneous Rocks of Washoe, Nevada, by Arnold

Hague and J. P. Iddings. 1885. 8°. 44 pp. Price 5 cents.

18. On Marine Eocene, Fresh-water Miocene, and other Fossil Mollnsca of Western North America,

by Charles A. White. 1885. 8°. 26 pp. 3 pi. Price 5 cents.

>.

,. 19. Notes on the Stratigraphy of California, by George F. Becker. 1885. 8°. 28pp. Price 5 cents.

AD.VERTISEMENT.

20. Contributions to the Mineralogy of the Eocky Mountains, by Whitman Cross and W. F. Hille-

fcrand. 1885. 8°. 114 pp. 1 pi. Price 10 cents.

21. The Lignites of the Great Sioux Reservation, by Bailey Willis. 1885. 8°. 16 pp. 5 pi. Price

-5 cents. 22. On New Cretaceous Fossils from California, by Charles A. White. 1835. 8°. 25 pp. 5 pi.

Price 5 cents.

23. Observations on the Junction between the Eastern Sandstone and the Keweenaw Series on

Keweenaw Point, Lake Superior, by R. D. Irving and T. C. Chamberlin. 1885. 8°. 124 pp. 17 pi.

Price 15 cents. 24. List of Marine Mollusca, comprising the Quaternary fossils and recent forms from American

localities between Cape Hatteras and Cape Eoque, including the Bermudas, by W. H. Dall. 1885. 8°.

336 pp. Price 25 cents.

,

25. The Present Technical Condition of the Steel Industry of the United States, by Phineas Barnes.

«885. 8°. 85pp. Price 10 cents.

26. Copper Smelting, by Henry M. Howe. 1885. 8°. 107pp. Price 10 cents.

27. Report of work done in the 'division of Chemistry and Physics, mainly during the fiscal year

l884-'85. 1886. 8°. 80pp. Price 10 cents.

28. The Gabbros and Associated Hornblende Rocks occurring in the neighborhood of Baltimore, Md.,

l>y George H. Williams. 1886. 8°. 78 pp. 4 pi. Price 10 cents.
29. On the Fresh-water Invertebrates of the North American Jurassic, by Charles A. White. 1886.

18°. 41 pp. 4 pi. Price 5 cents. 30. Second contribution to the studies on the Cambrian Faunas of North America, by Charles D.

Walcott. 1886. 8°. 379pp. 33'pl. Price 25 cents.

31. A systematic review of our present knowledge of Fossil Insects, including Myriapods and Arach-

nids, by Samuel H. Scudder. 1886. 8°. 128 pp. Price 15 cents.

32. Mineral Springs of the United States, by Albert C. Peale. 1886. 8°. 235 pp. Price 20 cents.

33. Notes on the Geology of Northern California, by Joseph S. Diller. 1886. 8°. 23 pp. Price 5

cents.

34. On the relation of the Laramie Molluscan Fauna to that of the succeeding Fresh-water Eocene

and other groups, by Charles A. White. 188G. 8°. 54 pp. 5 pi. Price 10 cents.

35. The Physical Properties of the Iron-Carburets, by Carl Barus and Vincent Strouhal. 1886. 8°.

2 pp. Price 10 cents.

Numbers 1 to 6 of the Bulletins form Volume I; Numbers 7 to 14, Volume II; Numbers 15 to 23,

Volume III; and Numbers 24 to 30, Volume IV. Volume V is not yet complete.

The following are in press, viz:

36. The Subsidence of small particles of Insoluble Solid in Liquid, by Carl Barus.

37. Types of the Laramie Flora, by Lester F. Ward.

38. Peridotite of Elliott County, Kentucky, by Joseph S. Diller.

39. The Upper Beaches and Deltas of the Glacial Lake Agassiz, by Warren Upham.

In preparation:

40. Geologic notes in Northern Washington Territory, by Bailey Willis.

41. Fossil Faunas of the Upper Devonian the Genesee Section, by Henry S. Williams.

Bibliography of North American Crustacea, by A. W. Vogdes.

STATISTICAL PAPERS.
A fourth series of publications, having special reference to the mineral resources of the United States, has been undertaken.
Of that series the following have been published, viz: Mineral Resources of the United States [1882], by Albert Williams, jr. 1883. 8°. xvii, 813 pp. Price SO cents. Mineral Resources of the United States, 1883 and 1884, by Albert Williams, jr. 1885. 8°. xiv, 1016 pp. Price 60 cents. In preparation: Mineral Resources of the United States for calendar year 1885, by Albert Williams, Jr.

Correspondence relating to the publications of the Survey, and all remittances, which must be by

POSTAL NOTE or MONEY ORDER (not stamps), should be addressed

TO THE DlEECTOR OF THE

UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SUBVEY,

WASHINGTON, D. C., October 15,1886.

WASHINGTON, D. C.

