Mineral Resources the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study , Jackson County, Oregon
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1 744-C

AVAILABILITY OF BOOKS AND MAPS OF THE U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Instructions on ordering publications of the U.S. Geological Survey, along with prices of the last offerings, are given in the current-year issues of the monthly catalog "New Publications of the U.S. Geological Survey." Prices of available U.S. Geological Survey publications released prior to the current year are listed in the most recent annual "Price and Availability List" Publications that are listed in various U.S. Geological Survey catalogs (see back inside cover) but not listed in the most recent annual "Price and Availability List" are no longer available.
Prices of reports released to the open files are given in the listing "U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Reports," updated monthly, which is for sale in microfiche from the U.S. Geological Survey, Books and Open-File Reports Section, Federal Center, Box 25425, Denver, CO 80225. Reports released through the NTIS may be obtained by writing to the National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161; please include NTIS report number with inquiry.
Order U.S. Geological Survey publications by mail or over the counter from the offices given below.

BY MAIL ,
Books
Professional Papers, Bulletins, Water-Supply Papers, Techniques of Water-Resources Investigations, Circulars, publications of general interest (such as leaflets, pamphlets, booklets), single copies ofEarthquakes & Volcanoes, Preliminary Determination of Epicenters, and some miscellaneous reports, including some of the foregoing series that have gone out of print at the Superintendent of Documents, are obtainable by mail from
U.S. Geological Survey, Books and Open-File Reports Federal Center, Box 25425 Denver, CO 80225
Subscriptions to periodicals (Earthquakes & Volcanoes and Preliminary Determination of Epicenters) can be obtained ONLY from the
Superintendent of Documents Government Printing Office
Washington, D.C. 20402
(Check or money order must be payable to Superintendent of Documents.)

OVER THE COUNTER
Books
Books of the U.S. Geological Survey are available over the counter at the following Geological Survey Public Inquiries Offices, all of which are authorized agents of the Superintendent of Documents:
WASHINGTON, D.C.--Main Interior Bldg., 2600 corridor, 18th and CSts.,NW. DENVER, Colorado-Federal Bldg., Rm. 169,1961 Stout St. LOS ANGELES, California-Federal Eldg., Rm. 7638,300 N. Los Angeles St. MENLO PARK, Callfornia-Bldg. 3 (Stop 533), Rm. 3128, 345 Middiefield Rd. RESTON, Virginia-503 National Center, Rm. 1C402,12201 Sunrise Valley Dr. SALT LAKE CITY, Utah-Federal Bldg., Rm. 8105,125 South State St. SAN FRANCISCO, California-Customhouse, Rm. 504,555 Battery St. SPOKANE, Washington-US. Courthouse, Rm. 678, West 920 Riverside Ave.. ANCHORAGE. Alaska-Rm. 101,4230 University Dr. ANCHORAGE, Alaska-Federal Bldg, Rm. E-146,701 C St.

Maps
For maps, address mail orders to

U.S. Geological Survey, Map Distribution Federal Center, Box 25286 Denver, CO 80225
Residents of Alaska may order maps from
Alaska Distribution Section, U.S. Geological Survey, New Federal Building- Box 12
101 Twelfth Ave., Fairbanks, AK 99701

Maps Maps may ^ purchased over ^ counter at the U.S. Geologi-
caj Survey offices where books are sold (all addresses in above list) and at the following Geological Survey offices:
ROLLA, Missouri-1400 Independence Rd. . DENVER, Colorado-Map Distribution, Bldg. 810, Federal
Center . FAiRBANKS, Alaska-New Federal Bldg., 101 Twelfth Ave.

Chapter C
Mineral Resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon
By WILLIAM J. PICKTHORN, RICHARD J. GOLDFARB, DONALD PLOUFF, STEVEN J. SUTLEY, and MARK D. WILCOX U.S. Geological Survey THOMAS J. PETERS and SPENCEE L. WILLETT U.S. Bureau of Mines
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1 744
MINERAL RESOURCES OF WILDERNESS STUDY AREAS: CENTRAL AND FAR WESTERN OREGON

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR MANUEL LUJAN, JR., Secretary
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY Dallas L. Peck, Director

Any use of trade, product, or firm names in this publication is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, WASHINGTON : 1990
For sale by the Books and Open-File Reports Section U.S. Geological Survey Federal Center, Box 25425 Denver, CO 80225

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Mineral resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness study areas, Jackson

County, Oregon / by William J. Pickthorn ... [et al.].

p. cm. (Mineral resources of wilderness study areas south

-central Oregon : ch. C) (U.S. Geological Survey bulletin : 1744)

Includes bibliographical references (p. ).

1. Mines and mineral resources Oregon Soda Mountain Wilderness.

2. Soda Mountain Wilderness (Or.) I. Pickthorn, William J.

II. Series. III. Series: U.S. Geological Survey bulletin ; 1744.

QE75.B9 no. 1744-C

557.3 s dc20

90-13915

[TN24.07]

[553 1 .09795 '27J

CIP

STUDIES RELATED TO WILDERNESS
Bureau of Land Management Wilderness Study Area
The Federal Land policy and Management Act (Public Land 94-579, October 21, 1976) requires the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Bureau of Mines to conduct mineral surveys of certain areas to determine the mineral values, if any, that may be present. Results must be made available to the public and be submitted to the President and the Congress. This report presents the results of mineral surveys of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area (OR-011-017), Jackson County, Oregon.

CONTENTS
Summary Cl Abstract Cl Character and setting Cl Identified resources and mineral resource potential Cl
Introduction Cl Area description C2 Previous and present studies C3 Acknowledgments C3
Appraisal of identified resources C3 Mining and mineral exploration history C3 Soda Mountain prospect/mineralized area C3 Mineral economics and resources C5
Assessment of mineral resource potential C5 Geology C5 Geochemical studies C5 Geophysical studies C6 Mineral and energy resource potential C7
References C7 Appendixes C9
Definitions of levels of mineral resource potential and certainty of assessment CIO
Resource/reserve classification Cll Geologic time chart C12
FIGURES
1. Index map showing location of Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon C2
2. Map showing mineral resource potential and generalized geology of Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon C4
3. Aeromagnetic map of Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon C6
4. Gravity map of Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon C7
Contents

Mineral Resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon

By William J. Pickthorn, Richard J. Goldfarb, Donald Plouff, Steven J. Sutley, and Mark D. Wilcox U.S. Geological Survey

Thomas J. Peters and Spencee L. Willett U.S. Bureau of Mines
SUMMARY
Abstract
At the request of the Bureau of Land Management, 5,640 acres that comprise the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area (OR-011-017), in south-central Oregon, were evaluated for mineral resources (known) and mineral resource potential (unknown). In this report the area studied is referred to as "the wilderness study area." The dominant rock types in the study area are basaltic and andesitic flows and breccia and minor outcrops of silicic tuff. Although there are no identified resources and there has been no significant prospecting activity, an outcrop of altered silicic tuff in the northern part of the study area has been prospected for gold. Much of the northern part of the study area has moderate potential for gold and silver. The study area has a low potential for geothermal resources. The study area has low resource potential for oil and gas and building stone; a small area in the south has low potential for gold in placer deposits.
Character and Setting
The Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area is located along the west flank of the Cascade Range in Jackson County, Oregon, about 17 mi southeast of Ashland, Oregon (fig. 1). Approximately 75 percent of the densely vegetated study area comprises steep ridges and canyons forming the south face of Soda Mountain. Total relief of the study area is about 3,000 ft with a maximum elevation of 5,760 ft. The study area is underlain by gently northeast-dipping Oligocene (see appendixes for geologic time chart) volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks, principally basalt and andesite.
Manuscript approved for publication, September 4, 1990.

Identified Resources and Mineral Resource Potential
The Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area has no identified mineral resources or significant prospecting activity. However, the small Soda Mountain prospect was located in an area of hydrothermally altered silicic tuff and andesite breccia on a ridge northeast of Camp Creek; it consists of a 7-ft-deep shaft and a nearby shallow pit Gold values of the altered rocks at the prospect are as high as 0.06 oz per ton. Geochemical data from rock and soil samples suggest more mineralization south of the prospect area; that area is assigned a moderate potential for gold. Much of the northern part of the study area is also assigned moderate potential for gold and silver on the basis of geochemical evidence. No geothermal leases exist in the study area and there is a low potential for geothermal resources. There is also low potential for oil and gas resources. The possibility of placer gold and building stone resources was also investigated, but no occurrences were observed; their potential is also assigned as low.
INTRODUCTION
This mineral survey was requested by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and is a cooperative effort of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and the U.S. Bureau of Mines (USBM). An introduction to the wilderness review process, mineral survey methods, and agency responsibilities is provided by Beikman and others (1983). The USBM evaluates identified resources at individual mines and known mineralized areas by collecting data on current and past mining activities and through field examination of mines, prospects, claims, and mineralized ar-

Mineral Resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Area, Jackson County, Oregon C1

eas. Identified resources are classified according to a system that is a modification of that described by McKelvey (1972) and the U.S. Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey (1980). Studies by the USGS are designed to provide a reasonable scientific basis for assessing the potential for undiscovered mineral resources by determining geologic units and structures, possible environments of mineral deposition, presence of geochemical and geophysical anomalies, and the application of ore-deposit models. Methodology and terminology as they apply to these mineral assessment surveys were discussed by Goudarzi (1984). See the appendixes for the definition of levels of mineral resource potential and certainty of assessment and for the resource/reserve classification.

Area Description
The Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area is situated along the west flank of the Cascade Range, approximately 17 mi southeast of Ashland, Oregon, immediately north of the California border. Best access is by an improved BLM dirt road that leads south from Oregon Highway 66 at Green Springs to a fire lookout tower and microwave relay facility on the peak of Soda Mountain on the north edge of the study area. Access is also possible by dirt roads and jeep trails east from Interstate Highway 5 near Siskyou, and north from Irongate Reservoir in northern California. Elevations in the study area range from 2,920 ft at Salt Creek to 5,760 ft on the flank of Soda Mountain. Most tower

122°.45'

122°30'

122°15'

OU N T A

APPROXIMATE BOUNDARY OF
SODA MOUNTAIN WILDERNESS STUDY AREA
(OR-011-017)

_ _ ___ CALIFORNIA ___ jj2__ OREGON SISKIYOUCO ~

Figure 1. Index map showing location of Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon C2 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Central and Far Western Oregon

elevation slopes and stream valleys are covered by dense brush, and the higher ridges are vegetated by pine and fir. Open grasslands are present on the gentle slopes in the eastern part of study area.
Previous and Present Studies
Geologic mapping, geochemical sampling, geophysical studies, and mineral-assessment studies that include the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area were done on a regional scale for the Medford 1° by 2° quadrangle. These studies are listed and summarized in Smith and others (1986). Geologic mapping by Wells (1956) covered a small part of the west edge of the study area.
Detailed field investigations by the USGS were conducted in the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area during the summer and fall of 1988 and spring of 1989. This work included geologic mapping, geochemical sampling, and examination of outcrops for evidence of alteration and mineralization. The geochemical survey utilized rock and stream-sediment (including a fine-fraction and heavy-mineral-concentrate) samples that were analyzed for 37 elements by semiquantitative emission spectrography. All rocks were analyzed for gold and mercury by atomic absorption, and for arsenic, bismuth, cadmium, antimony, and zinc by inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP). Geophysical data, which consisted of gravity information collected during the Medford quadrangle study, and aeromagnetic data collected by Oregon State University and covering the Cascade Range were analyzed and interpreted.
The USBM examined prospects and mineralized zones within and adjacent to the study area to evaluate identified mineral resources. Prefield preparation included a library search of pertinent geological and mining literature, BLM master title plats, and current mining claim recordation data. Information was also obtained from the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries at Grants Pass, and the USBM Mineral Industries Location System (MILS). A field search was conducted for mines, prospects, and mineralized areas in and near the study area. Mineralized sites were examined and mapped. Ninety-eight samples were collected; these included 41 rock, 52 soil, and five alluvial samples. Rock samples were analyzed for nine major-element oxides, LOI (loss of ignition), and 34 trace elements. Soil samples were analyzed for 34 trace elements, and alluvial samples were analyzed for free gold and other heavy minerals (Peters and Willett, 1989).
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Joseph G. Dauenhauer, owner of the Barron mine, for permission to visit the mine, and to John Archer for showing us the property. Edward D.

Fields, Boise Cascade Corporation, Spokane, Wash., and Len Ramp, Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, Grants Pass, provided valuable geological information. Gerry Capps, James Renthal, and Fred Tomlins, BLM, Medford, and Thomas Maier, U.S. Forest Service, Prospect, Oreg., and Steve Bulkin, U.S. Forest Service, Medford, Oreg., provided information and logistical support. James G. Smith of the USGS provided insight to the geology and resource appraisal.
APPRAISAL OF IDENTIFIED RESOURCES
By Thomas J. Peters andSpencee L. Willett U.S. Bureau of Mines
Mining and Mineral Exploration History
Although mining in southwest Oregon dates back to the 1850's, there has been relatively little activity in the volcanic and volcaniclastic terrane of the southern Oregon Cascade Range. Minor exploration activity has occurred at the Soda Mountain prospect, as evidenced by a 7-ft-deep shaft and shallow pit; the identity of the prospector(s), however, is not known. At least one company engaged in gold exploration has visited the prospect prior to this study.
BLM mining claim records show a lode claim was located in the Nl/2 of section 6, township 41 S., range 3 E., on November 20, 1983, by Myrle E. and Betty Dodson of the Medford area; the authors were unable to contact the Dodsons. The claim must have been in or near the west corner of the wilderness study area, probably along Lone Pine Ridge (fig. 2). A ground search of the area disclosed no evidence of mineralization or exploration and mining activity.
Mark Hermiston, BLM geologist, Medford, collected 28 stream-sediment and five rock samples from the wilderness study area and vicinity during a reconnaissance geochemical survey (Rimal, 1985, p. 50-53).
Soda Mountain Prospect/Mineralized Area
Access to the Soda Mountain prospect is by the Soda Mountain Road, south from Green Springs Mountain on Oregon Highway 66 (fig. 2). The prospect area straddles the study area boundary (fig. 2). The only known workings consist of a 7-ft-deep, 3-ft-diameter shaft and a shallow pit. The prospect lies on the north edge of area underlain primarily by pervasively kaolinized and silicified rhyolite tuff.
This siliceous tuff and andesite in the prospect area (Peters and Willett, 1989, pi. 1) are cut by prominent steeply dipping joint sets trending between N. 60° W. and N. 75° E., and clustering at N. 70° W. and N. 80° E. Limonite, goethite, and hematite are present on the joints and frac-

Mineral Resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Area, Jackson County, Oregon C3

R2E.R3E

122°30 1

122°25' R3E R4E

APPROXIMATE BOUNDARY
SODA MOUNTAIN ^WILDERNESS STUDY AREA
(OR-01*

EXPLANATION

Area having moderate mineral

Deposit types

resource potential (M)

[1] Epithermal vein

[2] Placer

Area having low mineral resource

potential (L)

Description of map units

Qal Alluvium (Quaternary) Mostly

Levels of certainty of assessment

unconsolidated stream sand

Data only suggest level of

and gravel

potential

TV Volcanic rocks (Tertiary)

Data give good indication of level

of potential

Data clearly define level of

potential

ft

Basalt, basaltic andesite, and andesite flows and breccia; age is Oligocene
Tuff (Tertiary) Silicic ashflow

Commodities

tuff; may be aquagene, in part

Ag Au Geo O, G

Silver Gold Geothermal Oil and gas

- Contact Dashed where approximately located
Soda Mountain prospect

Stone Building stone

Borrow pit

Figure 2. Mineral resource potential and generalized geology of Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon. Base from U.S. Geological Survey 1:62,000-scale Ashland (1954) and Hyatt Reservoir (1955) quadrangles, Oreg.Calif. Contour interval 40 and 80 ft.

C4 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Central and Far Western Oregon

tures. Epidote alteration and weak arsenopyrite mineralization were also observed. Flow banding is not apparent in most places, but in the prospect area it dips 30° E. where observed.
Mineral Economics and Resources
Gold concentrations in rock and soil samples from the Soda Mountain prospect (Peters and Willett, 1989) delineate a 10-acre gold-bearing mineralized zone. Three rock samples from the southern part of the prospect area contained 280, 210, and 2,100 parts per billion (ppb) (0.008, 0.006, and 0.06 oz per ton) gold, respectively, worth $3.30, $2.40, and $24.80 per ton at a $400 per oz gold price.
Possible occurrences of placer gold and building stone resources were also investigated (Peters and Willett, 1989, p. 11), but no resources were identified. Five alluvial samples from streambeds draining the study area contained placer gold with an in situ value of 0,2,2, 5, and 20 cents per yd3 at a $400 per oz gold price; no extensive alluvial bars were observed. None of the stone observed had special physical properties, such as splitting into flat slabs useful for facing stone, nor special chemical properties, such as an extraordinarily high alumina content suitable as an alternative source of aluminum ore in the distant future. The stone appears to have value only as road metal, a low-value, high-volume end use economically suitable for local application only; ample supplies of stone are present locally outside the study area.
ASSESSMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCE POTENTIAL
By William J. Pickthorn, Richard J. Goldfarb, Donald Plouff, Steven J. Sutley, and Mark D. Wilcox U.S. Geological Survey
Geology
The Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area lies along the west flank of the Cascade Range and the geology consists of volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks of the Cascade Volcanic Arc. These rocks were erupted during the Oligocene and early Miocene Epochs (Smith and others, 1986). This sequence is collectively called the volcanic rocks of the western Cascade Range. In southern Oregon the volcanic rocks of the western Cascade Range are structurally simple, forming a homoclinal sequence that dips gently north-northeast. Because of shifting eruptive centers and the interfingering and overlapping of volcanic and sedimentary units, a simple stratigraphic sequence does not exist. Rapid facies changes are common within a single unit
The study area lies entirely within a single regional reconnaissance volcanic unit mapped by Smith and others

(1982) as Oligocene basalt, basaltic andcsite, and andesite. Individual depositional units have varying appearance due to textural changes, rather than compositional changes, and thus were not mapped separately. Much of the study area is covered by dense brush and extensive soils are developed on the slopes. Smith and others (1982) indicate no major faults in their mapping, and none were noted in this study. Small landslides are present on the steeper slopes and on the south face of Soda Mountain.
Several outcrops of a recently mapped silicic tuff (Peters and Willett, 1989) are present in the northern part of the study area, along a tributary to Camp Creek. The tuff unit appears to pinch and swell and the thickness could not be accurately determined. The unit appears to be dominantly bedded, suggesting an aquagene origin in pan. Fragments of the tuff present along Camp and Dutch Oven Creeks suggest that the tuff may extend to the west but no outcrops were observed in the thick brush.
Geochemical Studies
The geochemical survey of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area consisted of the collection and analysis of eight stream-sediment and heavy-mineral-concentrate samples and 31 rock samples from inside, and immediately adjacent to, the study area. Stream-sediment samples were air-dried and sieved to minus-80-mesh fractions. All concentrate samples were panned from 1.5 to 2 Ib of minus-10mesh sediment using a gold pan. In the laboratory, the concentrates were air-dried, the lighter material was removed using bromoform, and the magnetic heavy-mineral fractions were removed using a magnetic separator. Sediment and rock samples were analyzed for 35 elements and nonmagnetic concentrate samples were analyzed for 37 elements using optical emission spectrography according to the method outlined by Grimes and Marranzino (1968). In addition, all rocks and sediments were analyzed by atomicabsorption spectrometry for gold, all rocks were analyzed by atomic-absorption spectrometry for mercury, and all sediments and selected altered rocks were analyzed by ICP for arsenic, bismuth, cadmium, antimony, and zinc. Complete analytical data and a detailed discussion of the sampling and analytical methods are given in Sutley and others (1990).
With the exception of samples collected from the Soda Mountain prospect, most of the lithogeochemical data for basalt, andesite, vein quartz, and jasperoid samples show background levels for all elements studied. Gold concentrations were below the 50 ppb lower determination limit and most mercury concentrations were less than 100 ppb. One quartz vein, however, contained 120 ppb mercury with no other anomalous element values. The only significant geochemical anomalies were for hydrothermally altered siliceous volcanic breccia and tuff samples collected at the Soda Mountain prospect These altered rocks contain as

Mineral Resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Area, Jackson County, Oregon C5

much as 1.5 parts per million (ppm) silver, 127 ppm arsenic, greater than 2,000 ppm boron, 10 ppm bismuth, 2.9 ppm mercury, 100 ppm lead, and 28 ppm antimony. Some samples are slightly enriched in copper, molybdenum, and tin compared to samples from the rest of the study area. None of the anomalous rocks, however, contained detectable gold at the 50-ppb lower determination limit. However, Peters and Willett (1989) report as much as 2.10 ppm gold, as well as 19 ppm, silver, 11,200 ppm arsenic, 2.3 ppm mercury, 1,724 ppm lead, and 76 ppm antimony, for altered tuff from the prospect. This discrepancy in reported chemical analyses is most likely due to "nugget effect."
Stream-sediment and heavy-mineral-concentrate data suggest other areas of weakly altered volcanic rocks elsewhere within the study area. The three stream sediments collected along the east edge of the study area are weakly anomalous in silver, arsenic, and (or) zinc. Sediment and concentrate samples collected near the junction of Camp and Dutch Oven Creeks contain above-background concentrations of silver, arsenic, boron, and (or) lead, a suite of elements similar to those elements present in anomalous concentrations in the altered rock samples. Microscopic examination of the most anomalous heavy-mineral-concentrate sample, collected on Dutch Oven Creek about 100 yd above its junction with Camp Creek, revealed the presence of grains of pyrite, arsenopyrite, and galena.
Geophysical Studies
Geophysical evaluation of the mineral resources of the study area was based on interpretations of aeromagnetic and gravity surveys.
As part of the USGS Geothermal Program, Oregon State University was funded to collect aeromagnetic data in the Cascade Range. The area surrounding the study area was flown at an elevation at 9,000 ft above sea level along east-west flightlines spaced approximately 1 mi apart (Couch and others, 1981; Couch, 1982) (fig. 3). Most of the study area lies along the south and southwest edges of an eastwest-elongated aeromagnetic high (fig. 3). The shape and location of the aeromagnetic high generally reflects moderate magnetization of underlying andesite to basalt flows (Smith and others, 1982), as confirmed by the presence of a local magnetic crest of the magnetic high over Soda Mountain. Magnetic gradients extending over horizontal distances of nearly 2 mi near the study area suggest that the thickness of the causative magnetic body or bodies substantially exceeds that of volcanic rocks that crop out near the study area. The aeromagnetic high centered north of the study area is situated near the south edge of a prominent set of magnetic highs that extend north-northwestward for about 60 mi. Blakely (1986) interpreted the set of magnetic highs as possibly being caused by a fault-bounded underlying ultramafic sheet or a thick sequence of Tertiary volcanic rocks.

The magnetic gradients in the study area apparently reflect a steeply dipping or fault-bounded interface between deepseated plutonic or volcanic rocks and surrounding, less magnetic basement rocks. The magnetic gradient is interrupted along the south edge of the study area by a magnetic low. The magnetic low probably is caused by rocks of low magnetization in and beneath a 1-mi-diameter outcrop of mafic intrusive rocks of Tertiary age centered at the south edge of the study area (Smith and others, 1982).
The USGS established eight gravity stations in and within 3 mi from the border of the study area during a regional mineral appraisal of public lands in the Medford 1° by 2° quadrangle (R.J. Blakely, written commun., 1989). These data were supplemented with gravity data obtained from Oregon State University as part of Blakely's compilation. Locations, elevations, and terrain corrections for these data were revised to reflect topography on 7 1/2-minute topographic maps published since the original gravity data were collected. North-northwest-trending contours in the region generally reflect thickening of the crust away from the Pacific coast and a decrease of the local gravity anomaly toward a regional gravity trough along the Cascade Range (Blakely and others, 1985). The most prominent feature of the gravity map of the study area is a gravity high centered near the southwest edge of the study area and its enclosing gravity contours (fig. 4). The shape of the contours and the position and orientation of the gravity high are uncertain because there are only a few stations in the area. The location of the gravity high and, consequently its source, is also uncertain because its effect is superimposed on a strong

12 2°30'

122°2C'

Figure 3. Aeromagnetic map of Soda Mountain Wilderness Area, Oregon (shaded). Values of magnetic intensity of Earth's magnetic field in nanoTeslas (nT) (1 nT=1 gamma) at arbitrary datum; International Geomagnetic Reference Field has been removed. Contour interval 40 nT; dot, magnetic station; contours hachured in direction of lower magnetic intensities. Dashed line, center of magnetic low discussed in text.

C6 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Central and Far Western Oregon

regional gravity gradient We speculate that the source of the gravity high that interrupts the regional gradient also is associated with the underlying source of the mafic intrusive rocks that crop out nearby.

Mineral and Energy Resource Potential
Geologic, geochemical, and geophysical investigations suggest potential for epithermal precious metal mineralization in the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area. Singer and others (1983) indicate much of the area on the Medford 1° by 2° quadrangle that is underlain by Tertiary volcanic rocks is favorable for epithermal vein mineralization. One such area, based on rock samples with anomalous boron, mercury, and tellurium concentrations, is present approximately 1 mi north of the study area boundary. Also, the Barron mine, a past producer of gold and silver, is located within the Tertiary volcanic rocks about 10 mi northwest of the study area.
Hydrothermally altered silicic tuff and andesite breccia samples collected by the USBM and USGS from the area of the Soda Mountain prospect contain significant concentrations of gold and silver. This area has moderate resource potential for gold and silver, certainty level D. Stream-sediment and heavy-mineral-concentrate samples containing anomalous concentrations of many elements characteristic of epithermal mineralization suggest that other parts of the study area, lacking adequate outcrop exposure, may contain similar zones of alteration and possibly underwent gold-silver mineralization. These areas, along the north edge of the study area and within the Dutch Oven Creek

12 2° 30'

122° 20 1

Figure 4. Bouguer gravity anomaly map of Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Oregon (shaded). Gravity values in milliGals; contour interval 2 milliGals; dot, station location; contours hachured in direction of lower gravity values. Reduction density 2.67 g/cm3.

watershed, have a moderate resource potential for gold and silver, certainty level B.
The potential for geothermal resources in the study area is low, certainty level C. Areas of active geothermal energy and exploration are associated with silicic volcanism less than 2 Ma (million years) (Smith and Shaw, 1975) or areas of high heat flow, neither of which are present here.
The potential for oil and gas resources in the study area is low, certainty level C. This evaluation is based on the absence of suitable source or reservoir rocks.
The potential for building stone is also low, certainty level C.
A small area in the southern part of the study area has low potential for gold in placer deposits, certainty level C.
REFERENCES
Beikman, H.M., Hinkle, M.E., Frieders, Twila, Marcus, S.M., and Edward, J.R., 1983, Mineral surveys by the Geological Survey and the Bureau of Land Management Wilderness Study Areas: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 901,28 p.
Blakely, R.J., 1986, Maps showing aeromagnetic data and interpretation of the Medford 1° by 2° quadrangle, Oregon-California: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-1383-B, 2 sheets, scale 1:250,000.
Blakely, R.J., Jachens, R.C., Simpson, R.W., and Couch, R.W., 1985, Tectonic setting of the southern Cascade Range as interpreted from its magnetic and gravity fields: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 96, p. 43-48.
Couch, R.W., 1982, Maps showing total-field aeromagnetic anomalies and topography of the Cascade Mountain Range, northern California: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-198,2 sheets, scale 1:250,000.
Couch, R.W., Gemperle, M., McLain, W.H., and Conrad, G.G., 1981, Total field aeromagnetic anomaly map Cascade Mountain Range, southern Oregon: Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, Geological Map Series Map GMS17,1 sheet, scale 1:250,000.
Goudarzi, G.H., 1984, Guide to preparation of mineral survey reports on public lands: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-787,51 p.
Grimes, D.J., and Marranzino, A.P., 1968, Direct-current arc and alternating-current spark emission spectrographic field methods for the semiquantitative analysis of geologic materials: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 591,6 p.
McKelvey, V.E., 1972, Mineral resource estimates and public policy: American Scientist, v. 60, p. 32-40.
Peters, T.J., and Willett, S.L., 1989, Mineral resource of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon: U.S. Bureau of Mines Open-File Report MLA 32-89,24 p.
Rimal, Durga, coordinator, 1985, Preliminary geochemical data on some BLM-administered lands including Wilderness Study Areas in Oregon and Washington: U.S. Bureau of Land Management unnumbered report, Oregon State Office, Portland, 52 p.
Singer, D.A., Page, N.J, Smith, J.G., Blakely, R.J., and Johnson,

Mineral Resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Area, Jackson County, Oregon C7

M.G., 1983, Mineral resource assessment maps of the Medford 1° x 2° quadrangle Oregon-California: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-1383-C, scale 1:250,000,2 sheets. Smith, J.G., Blakely, R.J., Johnson, M.G., Page, N.J, Peterson, JA., Singer, D.A., and Whittington, C.L., 1986, The Conterminous United States Minerals Appraisal Program: Background information to accompany folio of geologic, geochemical, geophysical, and mineral resource maps of the Medford 1° by 2° quadrangle, Oregon and California: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 976. Smith, J.G., Page, NJ, Johnson, M.G., Moring, B.C., and Gray, Floyd, 1982, Preliminary geologic map of Medford 1° by 2° quadrangle, Oregon and California: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-955,1 sheet, scale 1:250,000.

Smith, R.L., and Shaw, H.R., 1975, Igneous-related geothermal systems, in White, D.L., ed., Assessment of geothermal resources of the United States 1975: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 76, p. 58-83.
Sutley, S.J., Goldfarb, R.J., and Pickthorn, W.J., 1990, Analytical results and sample locality map of stream-sediment, heavymineral-concentrate, and rock samples from the Soda Mountain Wilderness Study Area, Jackson County, Oregon: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-450,13 p.
U.S. Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey, 1980, Principles of a resource/reserve classification for minerals: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 831,5 p.
Wells, F.G., 1956, Geology of the Medford quadrangle, OregonCalifornia: U.S. Geological Survey Geologic Quadrangle Map GQ-89, scale 1:62,500.

C8 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Central and Far Western Oregon

APPENDIXES

DEFINITION OF LEVELS OF MINERAL RESOURCE POTENTIAL AND CERTAINTY OF ASSESSMENT
LEVELS OF RESOURCE POTENTIAL
H HIGH mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics indicate a geologic environment favorable for resource occurrence, where interpretations of data indicate a high degree of likelihood for resource accumulation, where data support mineral-deposit models indicating presence of resources, and where evidence indicates that mineral concentration has taken place. Assignment of high resource potential to an area requires some positive knowledge that mineral-forming processes have been active in at least part of the area.
M MODERATE mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics indicate a geologic environment favorable for resource occurrence, where interpretations of data indicate reasonable likelihood for resource accumulation, and (or) where an application of mineral-deposit models indicates favorable ground for the specified type(s) of deposits.
L LOW mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics define a geologic environment in which the existence of resources is permissive. This broad category embraces areas with dispersed but insignificantly mineralized rock, as well as areas with little or no indication of having been mineralized.
N NO mineral resource potential is a category reserved for a specific type of resource in a well-defined area. U UNKNOWN mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where information is inadequate to assign a low,
moderate, or high level of resource potential.
LEVELS OF CERTAINTY
A Available information is not adequate for determination of the level of mineral resource potential. B Available information only suggests the level of mineral resource potential. C Available information gives a good indication of the level of mineral resource potential. D Available information clearly defines the level of mineral resource potential.

A U/A

B H/B
HIGH POTENTIAL

C H/C
HIGH POTENTIAL

D H/D
HIGH POTENTIAL

M/B

M/C

M/D

MODERATE POTENTIAL MODERATE POTENTIAL UNKNOWN POTENTIAL
L/B L/C

MODERATE POTENTIAL
L/D

LOW POTENTIAL

LOW POTENTIAL

LOW POTENTIAL

N/D NO POTENTIAL

Abstracted with minor modifications from:

LEVEL OF CERTAINTY

Taylor, R.B., and Steven, T.A., 1983, Definition of mineral resource potential: Economic Geology, v. 78, no. 6, p. 1268-1270. Taylor, R.B., Stoneman, R.J., and Marsh, S.P., 1984, An assessment of the mineral resource potential of the San Isabel National Forest, south-central Colorado: U.S.
Geological Survey Bulletin 1638, p. 40-42. Goudarzi, G.H., compiler, 1984, Guide to preparation of mineral survey reports on public lands: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-0787, p. 7, 8.

C10 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Central and Far Western Oregon

RESOURCE/RESERVE CLASSIFICATION

IDENTIFIED RESOURCES

Demonstrated Measured Indicated

Inferred

UNDISCOVERED RESOURCES Probability Range

Hypothetical

Speculative

ECONOMIC
MARGINALLY ECONOMIC
SUBECONOMIC

Rese»rves
I Marginal Reserves
Demonstrated Subeconomic
Resources

Inferred Reserves
Inferred Marginal Reserves
Inferred Subeconomic
Resources

1 1
1 1 i

Major elements of mineral resource classification, excluding reserve base and inferred reserve base. Modified from McKelvey, V.E., 1972, Mineral resource estimates and public policy: American Scientist, v. 60, p. 32-40; and U.S. Bureau of Mines and U.S. Geological Survey, 1980, Principles of a resource/reserve classification for minerals: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 831, p. 5.

Mineral Resources of the Soda Mountain Wilderness Area, Jackson County, Oregon C11

GEOLOGIC TIME CHART Terms and boundary ages used by the U.S. Geological Survey in this report

EON
Phanerozoic
Proterozoic pre-Archean2

ERA Cenozoic

PERIOD

Quaternary

Tertiary

Neogene Subperiod
,
r dltx/c^i IL,

C- rctscGO u s

Mesozoic

Jurassic

Paleozoic

Triassic
Permian Pennsylvanian
Carboniferous Mississippian
Devonian
Silurian

Ordovician

Cambrian

Late Proterozoic Middle Proterozoic
Early Proterozoic Late Archean
Middle Archean
Early Archean

------ . . (3800?)- - -

EPOCH
Holocene " Pleistocene
Pliocene Miocene Oligocene Eocene Paleocene
Late Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Middle
Early

'Rocks older than 570 Ma also called Precambrian, a time term without specific rank, informal time term without specific rank.

AGE ESTIMATES OF BOUNDARIES IN
MILLION YEARS (Ma) 0.010 1.7 5
jo
55 66
yb 1 10
205
~?4O 290
-330 360
410
*** J / V
1600 2500
JL/UU t Af\f\

C12 Mineral Resources of Wilderness Study Areas: Central and Far Western Oregon

SELECTED SERIES OF U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY PUBLICATIONS

Periodicals
Earthquakes & Volcanoes (issued bimonthly). Preliminary Determination of Epicenters (issued monthly).
Technical Books and Reports
Professional Papers are mainly comprehensive scientific reports of wide and lasting interest and importance to professional scientists and engineers. Included are reports on the results of resource studies and of topographic, hydrologic, and geologic investigations. They also include collections ofrelated papers addressing different aspects of a single scientific topic.
Bulletins contain significant data and interpretations that are of lasting scientific interest but are generally more limited in scope or geographic coverage than Professional Papers. They include the results ofresource studies and ofgeologic and topographic investigations; as well as collections of short papers related to a specific topic.
Water-Supply Papers are comprehensive reports that present significant interpretive results of hydrologic investigations of wide interest to professional geologists, hydrologists, and engineers. The series covers investigations in all phases of hydrology, including hydrogeology, availability of water, quality of water, and use of water.
Circulars present administrative information or important scientific information of wide popular interest in a format designed for distribution at no cost to the public. Information is usually of short-term interest.
Water-Resources Investigations Reports are papers of an interpretive nature made available to the public outside the formal USGS publications series. Copies are reproduced on request unlike formal USGS publications, and they are also available for public inspection at depositories indicated in USGS catalogs.
Open-File Reports include unpublished manuscript reports, maps, and other material that are made available for public consultation at depositories. They are a nonpermanent form of publication that may be cited in other publications as sources of information.
Maps
Geologic Quadrangle Maps are multicolor geologic maps on topographic bases in 7 1/2- or 15-minute quadrangle formats (scales mainly 1:24,000 or 1:62,500) showing bedrock, surficial, or engineering geology. Maps generally include brief texts; some maps include structure and columnar sections only.
Geophysical Investigations Maps are on topographic or planimetric bases at various scales; they show results of surveys using geophysical techniques, such as gravity, magnetic, seismic, or radioactivity, which reflect subsurface structures that are ofeconomic or geologic significance. Many maps include correlations with the geology.
Miscellaneous Investigations Series Maps are on planimetric or topographic bases of regular and irregular areas at various scales; they present a wide variety of format and subject matter. The series also includes 71/2-minute quadrangle photogeologic maps on planimetric bases which show geology as interpreted from aerial photographs. Series also includes maps of Mars and the Moon.

Coal Investigations Maps are geologic maps on topographic or planimetric bases at various scales showing bedrock or surficial geology, stratigraphy, and structural relations in certain coal-resource areas.
Oil and Gas Investigations Charts show stratigraphic information for certain oil and gas fields and other areas having petroleum potential.
Miscellaneous Field Studies Maps are multicolor or black-andwhite maps on topographic or planimetric bases on quadrangle or irregular areas at various scales. Pre-1971 maps show bedrock geology in relation to specific mining or mineral-deposit problems; post-1971 maps are primarily black-and-white maps on various subjects such as environmental studies or wilderness mineral investigations.
Hydrologic Investigations Atlases are multicolored or black-andwhite maps on topographic or planimetric bases presenting a wide range ofgeohydrologic data ofboth regular and irregular areas; principal scale is 1:24,000 and regional studies are at 1:250,000 scale or smaller.
Catalogs
Permanent catalogs, as well as some others, giving comprehensive listings of U.S. Geological Survey publications are available under the conditions indicated below from the U.S. Geological Survey, Books and Open-File Reports Section, Federal Center, Box 25425, Denver, CO 80225. (See latest Price and Availability List)
"Publications of the Geological Survey, 1879-1961" may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form and as a set of microfiche.
"Publications of the Geological Survey, 1962-1970" may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form and as a set of microfiche.
"Publications of the U.S. Geological Survey, 1971-1981" may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form (two volumes, publications listing and index) and as a set of microfiche.
Supplements for 1982,1983,1984,1985,1986, and for subsequent years since the last permanent catalog may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback book form.
State catalogs, "List of U.S. Geological Survey Geologic and Water-Supply Reports and Maps For (State)," may be purchased by mail and over the counter in paperback booklet form only.
"Price and Availability List of U.S. Geological Survey Publications," issued annually, is available free of charge in paperback booklet form only.
Selected copies ofa monthly catalog "New Publications of the U.S. Geological Survey" available free of charge by mail or may be obtained over the counter in paperback booklet form only. Those wishing a free subscription to the monthly catalog "New Publications of the U.S. Geological Survey" should write to the U.S. Geological Survey, 582 National Center, Reston, VA 22092.
Note.-Prices of Government publications listed in older catalogs, announcements, and publications may be incorrect. Therefore, the prices charged may differ from the prices in catalogs, announcements, and publications.

