Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1590-A

I , ,. $1&$^^
/ /'I

'?' "^~~^

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California
ByJ.W. HARDEN
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1590-A
SOIL CHRONOSEQUENCES IN THE WESTERN UNITED STATES

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR DONALD PAUL MODEL, Secretary
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY Dallas L. Peck, Director

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, WASHINGTON : 1987

For sale by the Books and Open-File Reports Section U.S. Geological Survey Federal Center, Box 25425 Denver, CO 80225

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Harden, Jennifer Willa, 1954Soils developed in granitic alluvium near Merced, California.

(Soil chronosequences in the Western United States)

(U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1590-A)

Bibliography: p. A24-A26

Supt. of Docs. No.: I 19.3:1590-A

1. Soils California Merced River valley. 2. Soil

formation California Merced River valley. 3. Soil

chronosequences California Merced River valley. 4.

Granite California Merced River valley. 5. Alluvium

California Merced River valley. 6. Geology California

Merced River valley. 7. Geology, stratigraphic Cenozoic.

I. Title. II. Series: Soil chronosequences in the Western

United States. III. Series: United States. Geological

Survey. Bulletin 1590-A.

QE75.B9 no. 1590-A

557.3s

86-600047

[S599.C2]

[551.3'05]

FOREWORD
This series of reports, "Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States," attempts to integrate studies of different earth-science disciplines, including pedology, geomorphology, stratigraphy, and Quaternary geology in general. Each discipline provides information important to the others. From geomorphic relations we can determine the relative ages of deposits and soils; from stratigraphy we can place age constraints on the soils. Field investigations and mineralogic and sedimentologic studies provide information on the nature and types of deposits in which soils form. As a result of our work, we have estimated rates of soil formation, inferred processes of soil formation from trends in soil development with increasing age, and obtained information on the types of weathering that occur in various areas. In return, soil development and soil genesis have provided data on the age of landforms, the timing and duration of sedimentation, and, in some cases, the history of climatic fluctuations.
Between 1978 and 1983, a coordinated and systematic study was conducted on soil development in different types of geologic deposits in the Western United States. The goals of this project, led by the late D.E. Marchand and subsequently by M.N. Machette, were to learn whether rates of chemical, physical, and mineralogic transformations could be determined from soil Chronosequences; how these rates vary in different mineralogic and climatic environments; and how accurately soils can be used for such problems as estimating the ages of deposits, periods of landscape stability, and timing of fault movements. This series of reports presents data from several soil Chronosequences of that project.
More than 100 analyses on more than 1,000 samples were performed on soils collected in the Western United States. Some results have appeared in various Docks, journals, and maps (for example, Harden and Marchand, 1977, 1980; Burke and Birkeland, 1979; Dethier and Bethel, 1981; Marchand and Allwardt, 1981; Meixner and Singer, 1981; Busacca, 1982; Harden, 1982a, b; Harden and Taylor, 1983; Machette, 1983; Machette and Steven, 1983; Busacca and others, 1984; Machette and others, 1984; Reheis, 1984). In the reports in this series, the basic field information, geologic background, and analytical data are presented for each chronosequence, as well as some results additional to the previous publications.
One of the most significant aspects of these chronosequence studies is that in every study area, many soil parameters change systematically over time, or with the age of deposits. As Deming (1943) emphasized, it is this recurrence of correlation in such different conditions that is most significant to geologic and pedologic studies. In relatively moist areas, such as coastal and central California, such soil properties as percent clay or reddening of soil colors change most systematically over time. In more arid regions, such as in the Bighorn Basin of Wyoming, calcium carbonate and gypsum contents best reflect the relative ages of the deposits. A few parameters for example, elemental composition of sands or clays appear to be comparable between areas so diverse in climatic setting.
Numeric age control has enabled us to estimate rates of soil development. In some places, we have been able to compare rates between different areas. For example, in central California, rates of clay accumulation were found to be most rapid during the initial stages of soil development; these rates declined with increasing age. The straightest lines for regression were on a loglog scale. In coastal California, rates of clay accumulation appeared to be much higher than in central California. This difference in rates could be due to parent material (the coastal soils that we studied were formed on reworked shale and sandstone, whereas central California soils were developed in granitic alluvium), and (or) the differences in rates could be due to eolian additions of clay. In the Bighorn Basin of Wyoming, rates of clay accumulation, as well as most other soil properties, increased linearly over time, with no apparent decrease in initial rates.
The data we present here suggest many opportunities for further interpretation. For example, we may learn how climate, vegetation, and mineralogy affect the rates of clay formation or organic-matter accumulation. In some study areas, we present data for rare-earth elements, which could be used to examine how each element reacts in different weathering environments. These examples are only a fraction of the possible future studies that could be conducted on the data presented here.
J.W. Harden Editor
m

CONTENTS
Foreword III Abstract Al Introduction Al Geographic setting A2 Geologic setting A2
Previous work A2 Origin of deposits and regional late Cenozoic stratigraphy A4 Age control on alluvial units A5
Post-Modesto deposits A5 Modesto Formation A5 Riverbank Formation A7 Turlock Lake Formation A9 China Hat Gravel Member of the Laguna Formation A9 Provenance for Merced River deposits A10 Evaluation of soil development A10 Site selection and sampling criteria A10 Assumptions and methods All Trends of soil development with increasing age A12 Major- and trace-element chemistry A13 Relative rates of element loss A13
Methods for an accumulation series of elemental oxides A14 Methods for calculating loss percents of elemental oxides A15 Resulting orders of rates of element loss A17 Estimating rates of soil development A17 Discussion A2 0 Summary A22 References cited A24 Supplementary tables A27
FIGURES
1. Map of central California, showing location of study area A3 2. Geologic map showing late Cenozoic deposits along the Merced River A6 3. Profiles of Merced River terraces, showing sample localities A9 4-7. Plots of:
4. Ratio of pyroxene to zircon grains in the very fine sand fraction of C horizons of Merced soils Al 1
5. Etching scale of hornblende and zircon grains from the very fine sand fraction of Merced soils All
6. Examples of soil properties that develop over long timespans and for the initial timespans A13
7. Examples of soil properties that show changes after 100 ka A14 8. Chart showing examples of method for deriving an accumulation series for relative rates of
element loss or gain A15 9-12. Plots of:
9. Element percent loss from A and B horizons for three size fractions versus bestestimate age A18
10. Rates of soil-property development for three timespans A19 11. Clay content versus age A22 12. Example of estimating age from soil development A23 13. Map of study area in central California, showing locations of sample sites A29

TABLES 1. Generalized map units and taxonomic classes of soils of the Merced chronosequence A4 2. Age controls for alluvium in the northeastern San Joaquin Valley A8 3. Variation of rates of element loss from the A-horizon silt-plus-clay fraction, with age
uncertainties considered A16 4. Order of rates of element loss from size separates A19 5. Tests for constraining rates of soil development for late Cenozoic deposits A20 6. Tests for constraining rates of soil development for Holocene deposits A21 7. Tests for constraining rates of soil development for Pleistocene deposits A23 8. Comparison of Pleistocene and Holocene rates of soil development from tables 6 and 7 A23 SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES 1. Field descriptions A28 2. Physical properties A34 3. Extractive chemical analyses A3 7 4. Mineralogy A42 5. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 ym) fraction by X-ray fluorescence A45 6. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by X-ray fluorescence A49 7. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 ym) fraction by instrumental neutron activation A53 8. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by instrumental neutron activation ABO
VI

SOIL CHRONOSEQUENCES IN THE WESTERN UNITED STATES
Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California
By].\N. Harden

Abstract
Terrace and fan deposits along the Merced River in the San Joaquin Valley, Calif., have been approximately dated and range in age from about O.Z to 3,000 ka. Soils were sampled on nine deposits to establish a soil chronosequence in an area with a Mediterranean climate, grassland vegetation, and sandy granitic parent material. Soil samples were analyzed for several morphologic, chemical, physical, and mineralogic properties, many of which vary systematically with age. Properties showing the most systematic changes over time include: (1) field descriptions of clay films, total texture (texture plus wet consistence), rubification (color hue plus chroma), and dry consistence; (Z) depletion or concentration of Ca, Mg, Na, Fe, Al, and Ti relative to Zr, the most stable constituent; and (3) other physical and extractive-chemical characteristics, including clay mineralogy, dithionite- and oxalate-extractable Fe content, and total (titratable) soil acidity. Changes in soils over the 3,000-ka age span demonstrate that significant chemical differentiation, mineralogic transformations, and morphologic changes occurred as a result of soil development. The high correlation of soil characteristics with age provides a means to use the soils for correlating and dating late Cenozoic deposits.
INTRODUCTION
Alluvium in the northeastern San Joaquin Valley, Calif., offers an opportunity to study soils in an exceptionally well dated, widely spanned age sequence. Nine principal units of terrace and fan deposits range in age from about 0.2 to 3,000 ka; the ages of many of these deposits have been established or approximated by radiometric dating. Deposition of each unit was relatively rapid; major depositional events were separated by periods of stream

entrenchment and slow sedimentation (hiatuses).

Older, nested terrace and fan deposits are isolated

above modern stream channels and flood deposits, and

as a result, the ages of many of these deposits

(particularly the Pleistocene deposits) closely

approximate those of the surfaces and soils. In this

study, soils along the Merced River were sampled in

relatively flat, grass-covered areas, and a soil

chronosequence was established; that is, the soils

differ in age but appear to have formed under similar

conditions of climate, vegetation, slope position, and

parent material (Jenny, 1941).

Both the soils and geology in the Merced area

have been mapped and studied in detail by Arkley

(1962a, b) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981); their

work is carefully reviewed here to evaluate

radiometric ages and site-specific data that affect

interpretation of the soil chronosequence. For

example, uncertainty of age assignments is analyzed in

this report, and soil-development rates are estimated

by considering the uncertainties in radiometric ages

(and their relation to surfaces and soils). These rates

are estimated for several soil parameters, including

morphologic, bulk or total chemical, and extractive-

chemical characteristics.

The morphologic

characteristics have been reported previously (Harden,

1982a) but are reexamined in this report to provide a

more complete discussion of the soils. Other data are

presented here for the first time.

The wide age range represented by the

chronosequence of this study permits an evaluation of

the time dependence of soil (and soil property)

development. Some soil characteristics, such as color

hue and chroma, clay mineralogy, and the morphologic

soil-development index (Harden, 1982a), change

systematically over time. Other properties, including

clay films and percent loss of certain elements from

size separates, change significantly in the older

Pleistocene and Pliocene soils. Another set of

characteristics, including organic-carbon content and

dry consistence, change systematically in the younger

Holocene and latest Pleistocene soils.

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California Al

Acknowledgments. Innumerable people played important roles in the planning, excavation, analytical, and interpretative stages of this work. My project leader, the late Denis Marchand, conducted the geologic investigations and guided and supported this study throughout most of its history. M.J. Singer, A.J. Busacca, R. Meixner, and Peter Janitkzy not only conducted many of the soil analyses but also contributed many ideas and tests in the planning and execution of the work. E.M. Taylor was fundamental in all of the data compilation and contributed many ideas toward data analysis and future studies. C. Terhune and S. Walker spent countless hours in organizing the data presentation. M.N. Machette accepted and succeeded in the difficult task of continuing leadership of this work after the loss of Marchand. R. Mark contributed many ideas to the methods of data analysis and helped identify limitations that might be overcome in future work. G. Dembroff helped with some of the calculations. In conjunction with my doctoral dissertation, R.J. Arkley, Bans Jenny, H.E. Doner, and Clyde Wahrhaftig were helpful in their guidance and encouragement of this work. B.F. Atwater encouraged consideration of the effects of age uncertainties, which clearly strengthened the arguments and their validity. K.L. Pierce helped to clarify many of the main points of the manuscript, and J.C. Tinsley encouraged presentation of these ideas. Last, I thank the landowners of my excavation sites, without whom I could not have proved worthy of spending wisely the taxpayers' money: thanks go to the J.J. Stevinson Corp., M. Cotta, F. Moiser, R. Jones, C. Matheson, R. Armstrong, M. MacNeilson, L. Roedner, A. Spence, Mrs. A. Arkelian, Turlock Lake State Park, and the Circle J Ranch.
GEOGRAPHIC SETTING
The Merced River heads in the Sierra Nevada and flows through the Sierran foothills and the eastern San Joaquin Valley before joining the lower San Joaquin River to the west (fig. 1). The Sierra Nevada, glaciated several times during the Pleistocene, is underlain by granitic and dioritic rocks. Glacial outwash of the Merced River is the parent material for most of the soils discussed in this study; with the possible exception of Holocene alluvium, it is composed of granitic debris and minor mafic minerals derived from the metamorphic terrane of the foothills.
The study area has a Mediterranean climate in which most of the rain (mean annual precipitation, 30 cm) falls during the cool winters. Because evapotranspiration is low during the rainy season, rainfall is effective in penetrating and leaching the soil. During the dry summers, the soils are readily desiccated by evapotranspiration. The effective wetdry cycles constitute a xeric soil-moisture regime (Soil Survey staff, 1975). The mean annual temperature near the study area is about 16 °C, and the soiltemperature regime is thermic (Soil Survey staff, 1975).

GEOLOGIC SETTING
Previous work
In the 1950's, R.J. Arkley mapped the soils in much of the northeastern San Joaquin Valley (Arkley, 1954, 1962b) and began to elucidate the relation between soil development and the surficial geologic deposits in this area (table 1). Arkley (1962a, p. 3) differentiated soils developed in "recent alluvium, young alluvium, moderately old alluvium, high terrace gravels, and very high terrace gravels," and proposed a glacial origin for the deposits along the major streams heading in the Sierra Nevada. Davis and Hall (1959) used Arkley's mapping and designated three Pleistocene formations, which they named, from youngest to oldest, the Modesto, Riverbank, and Turlock Lake Formations.
The influence of Quaternary glaciations in the Sierra Nevada on deposition in the valley became widely recognized when Arkley (1962b), Wahrhaftig and Birman (1965), and Janda and Croft (1967) compared the glacial sequence of the Sierra (Blackwelder, 1931, 1932; Birman, 1954, 1957, 1964; Matthes, 1960; Birkeland, 1964) with the alluvial, glaciogenic sequence of the valley. Glacial deposits are not well preserved on the west slope of the Sierra, but similar (major unit) time stratigraphies and rock compositions are found in deposits along glaciated river drainages in both the Sierra Nevada and the San Joaquin Valley. Janda and Croft also used (1) the stratigraphy of subsurface cores in a confined basin, (2) available radiometric ages correlating valley units with glacial deposits, and (3) the regional similarity of glaciated river drainages in the northeastern San Joaquin Valley to link the origin of alluvial fans to glaciation in the Sierra Nevada. Janda (1965, 1966) and Janda and Croft (1967) subdivided the Modesto and Turlock Lake Formations on the basis of erosional unconformities and buried soils; with extensive fieldwork and limited age control, they proposed a sedimentation model of several cyclical, climatically induced periods of alluviation separated by periods of
nondeposition and soil formation. Helley (1966) extended Janda's (1966) model to
the unglaciated Chowchilla River basin in the San Joaquin Valley. Helley's stratigraphy is strikingly similar to that of the glaciated river basins nearby, and he concluded that alluviation in the Chowchilla drainage nearly coincides with alluviation in these glaciated river drainages. Helley further inferred that sedimentation over much of the San Joaquin Valley was probably induced by changes in erosion rates, landscape stability, and precipitation patterns of climatic origin which also were manifest as cycles of Sierra Nevada glaciation.
In the late 1970's, D.E. Marchand mapped the late Cenozoic deposits between Bakersfield and Stockton (including the Merced area) and established a widespread regional time stratigraphy that emphatically supports a climatic control on sedimentation in the eastern San Joaquin Valley. Marchand used the soil maps by Arkley (1962b), Ulrich and Stromberg (1962), and Huntington (1971) to examine soil differences in relation to geomorphic landform

A2 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

123° 39°

121'

119°

37°

50 KILOMETERS 35°
Figure 1. Central California, showing location of study area.

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A3

Table 1. Generalized map units and taxonomic classes of soils of the Merced chronosequence
[Units and approximate ages from Marchand and Allwardt (1981). Soil series from Arkley (1984). Taxonomic subgroups from Soil Survey staff (1975)]

Approx-

Unit

iamgaete

Soil series

Taxonomic subgroup

(ka)

Post-Modesto deposits-----
Modesto Formation Upper member-
Lower member
Riverbank FormationTurlock Lake Formation
Upper memberChina Hat Gravel Member
of the Laguna Formation.

0.2-3.0
10 40 100-300
600 3,000

Grangeville, Hanford-

Typic xerorthent.

Hanford, HoncutGreenfield Snel 1 ing- ---

Do. Typic haploxeralf.
Do.

Montepell ier--

Do.

Corning (acid variant) - Ultic palexeralf.

differences. From detailed mapping of the geology on
large-scale maps (Marchand, 1976b, c, d, e, f, g) and from additional radiometric ages (Marchand and Allwardts, 1981), Marchand (1977) (1) concurred with the sedimentation models of Arkley (1962a), Helley (1966), and Janda and Croft (1967); (2) subdivided the Pleistocene formations into even more units than Janda and Croft (1967) had recognized; and (3) extended the climatic model of sedimentation to
correlate with other climatic histories recorded in continental and marine records. Marchand (1976b, c,
d, e, f, g) separated as many as 24 mappable units but fewer time-stratigraphic units, 9 of which were sampled for this soil-chronosequence study. Although Marchand used soils to help recognize and map the
alluvial deposits, each of the nine units chosen for this study was also was recognized on the basis of (1) geomorphic expression of terrace and fan surfaces, (2) buried soils and unconformities, and (3) regional extent
along different river systems within the eastern San Joaquin Valley. Thus, major regional rather than local control of sedimentation was identified.
The late Cenozoic history and chronology of the
San Joaquin Valley as defined by Marchand (1977) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981) were used in this study for the chronology of Merced River deposits in this
study. Some new ages are available and have been added to this report. Most of the radiometric ages reported here were determined on deposits correlated with those along the Merced River. Discussions of
regional geology and age control are included below; in addition, more site specific details are discussed for the Merced area, in the context of the regional
mapping.

Quaternary alluvial terraces that are incised into older units near the Sierran foothills and open into alluvial fans to the west. Successively younger fans spread westward over older fans; thus, many alluvial units grade westward from surface to subsurface expression (Marchand and Allwardt, 1981). Tectonic uplift and
tilting of the Sierra Nevada are shown by depositional and erosional gradients in Tertiary and Quaternary
units that increase with increasing age (Marchand, 1977; Huber, 1981). Westward shift of fan apices in
the Quaternary units over time suggests relative subsidence of the valley, a tectonic trend demonstrated by Croft (1968, 1972) in subsurface lacustrine deposits.
Although tilting and uplift of the Sierra Nevada have occurred during the late Cenozoic, several lines of evidence support a climatic control on pulses of
alluviation in the eastern San Joaquin Valley. Janda and Croft (1967, p. 175) discounted eustatic control on deposition because alluvial units are found along the
Kings and Kaweah Rivers, which drain internally into the Tulare Lake basin; similar stratigraphies in open and closed drainages indicate that sedimentation was
not controlled by eustatic fluctuations in sea level. Janda and Croft discounted a tectonic origin for alluvial-fan deposition for the following two
reasons. (1) Quaternary alluvium predates the last major tilting of the Sierra Nevada, which occurred before deposition of the Turlock Lake Formation. More recently, however, Huber (1981) argued that tectonic deformation has continued and even accelerated during the late Cenozoic, although he also supported a glacial origin of alluvium in Sierran drainages in the San Joaquin Valley. (2) No major unconformities were recognized in the San Joaquin

Origin of deposits and regional late Cenozoic stratigraphy

Throughout the eastern San Joaquin Valley, 1-More recently, Atwater and others (1987) proposed tectonic uplift and tilting and cyclical patterns of that the Tulare Lake basin was not closed during parts
sedimentation have created a sequence of nested of early and middle Wisconsin time.

A4 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Basin subsurface to indicate episodic subsidence that would have caused the episodic alluviation found upstream.
As Marchand (1977) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981) indicated, a climatic control of sedimentation is supported by several features. (1) Unweathered granitic silt and very fine sand resembling glacial rock flour are found at the bases of deposits in glaciated drainages (Arkley, 1962a; Janda, 1965) whereas coarse sand and gravel, also typical of glacial outwash, commonly overlie the silt near fan apices. (2) At least two alluvial units, the upper member of the Modesto Formation and the upper unit of the Turlock Lake Formation, are nearly contemporaneous with glacial events. A minimum age for the Tioga glaciation in the Sierra Nevada (Adam, 1967) and ages for the end of the main stade of the Wisconsin glaciation of midcontinental North America (Frye, 1973, p. 277) approximately correspond to the minimum age for the upper member of the Modesto Formation. The upper unit of the Turlock Lake is contemporaneous with the end of marine oxygen-isotope stage 16, a time characterized by glacial conditions (Shackleton and Opdyke, 1976). (3) Uranium-trend ages (Rosholt, 1978, 1980; J.N. Rosholt, written communs., 1978, 1980, 1982) also coincide with the marine record for oxygen-isotope stages (Shackleton and Opdyke, 1976) of the end of glacial conditions.
Age control on alluvial units
The soils in this study compose the following time-stratigraphic units, from youngest to oldest : post-Modesto deposits; the upper and lower members of the Modesto Formation; the upper, middle, and lower units of the Riverbank Formation; the upper unit of the Turlock Lake Formation; and the China Hat Gravel Member of the Laguna Formation (fig. 2; table 2). Most of the age information is from Marchand and Allwardt (1981), except for some uranium-trend ages reported more recently (J-N... Rosholt, written commun., 1982) and some new C ages obtained by B.F. Atwater (unpub. data, 1984).
Uncertainties in the ages (table 2) are associated both with the regional correlations of units and with local conditions at the sampling sites. Any available ages must be related to the geomorphic surface at the site of soil sampling. Subdivision of the formations is especially subject to uncertainty in the ages; for example, in some areas, multiple terraces in a major unit could represent only a local phenomenon, such as recent aggradation, and thus make regional correlation invalid. A strong argument for subdividing alluvial units on a regional scale is that similar numbers of subunits occur along the major Sierran streams. For example, three surfaces are commonly associated with

the Riverbank Formation; this regionwide repetition of stratigraphy suggests a regional rather than a local control of sedimentation.
A major problem with identification and age assignment of subunits is that they must be correlated by using soil and geomorphic characteristics, which may not differ significantly for the age span considered. A good example of this problem occurs along the Tuolumne River (see Marchand and Harden, 1978), where four subunits or phases all have Hanford soils developed on them within the upper member of the Modesto Formation. Marchand and I distinguished these subunits throughout the quadrangle, but unless all four terrace levels are adjacent to each other, the differentiation is ambiguous, as we indicated by queries on our map. The uncertainty of stratigraphic assignment and correlation with dated localities varies among the different soil-sampling localities. Age control is discussed below, and sampling localities are considered for each stratigraphic unit to assess the reliability of age estimates (table 2).
Post-Modesto deposits
Post-Modesto alluvial deposits are divided into four units, all of which were mapped by Marchand and Allwardt (1981) along major Sierran streams in the northeastern San Joaquin Valley. Post-Modesto IV deposits, not sampled for this study, generally consist of unvegetated alluvium of channels and point bars. Post-Modesto HI (PM3) deposits, which form part of the modern flood plains, are 2 to 3 m above the modern stream channels (figs. 2, 3). Although no datable material has been found within post-Modesto HI deposits, very mature oak trees on the surface suggest that this surface is more than a few years old. Although I estimated that post-Modesto III deposits are 0.2 ka old (table 2), the surface could be as old as about 3 ka on the basis of the age of post-Modesto II (PM2) deposits, or as young as a few years if there has been recent aggradation on the surface.
Post-Modesto II deposits, extensive along the Merced River near Snelling, form a surface about 3 to 5 m above the modern channel (fig^ 3). Marchand and Allwardt (1981, p. 63-64) reported 14 C and U-Th ages that range from about 2 to 4.5 ka, but the dated deposits are situated near Orovilie and Stockton. A very conservative maximum age of 8.3 ka (sample Beta-2787) was provided by B.F. Atwater (written commun., 1983) on wood fragments in San Joaquin River deposits below the post-Modesto II surface near the mouth of the Tuolumne River. A more reasonable age estimate for post-Modesto II deposits is about 3 ka (table 2), but the post-Modesto II surface and soil could be younger if covered more recently by flood deposits.

The U.S. Geological Survey's convention of discussing units in the order of decreasing age is not
followed here because this report focuses on the
genesis of soils rather than on the evolution of geologic units.

Modesto Formation
The Modesto Formation is divided into two members (Marchand and Allwardt 1981). The upper member, which may include as many as four phases of alluvial filling and incision, may be as old as about 27 to 29 ka at its base and as young as 8 or 9 ka at its

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

AS

Figure 2. Geologic map showing late Cenozoic deposits along the Merced River, Geology compiled from Marchand (1976a, b, c, d) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981).

surface. The upper member appears to be correlative
with the Tioga glaciation, which ended before about 9.8 ka (Adam, 1967), and with the end of marine
oxygen-isotope stage 2 of Shackleton and Opdyke (1976). The minimum constraining age of 8.23 ka is
based on charcoal in San Joaquin River deposits that are set into the upper member at the toe of the Tuolumne River fan (table 2). The. maximum constraining age of 31.24 ka is based on C data on
charcoal in deposits beneath the same late Modesto fan (table 2). Marchand and Allwardt (1981, p. 57) also cited a constraining (maximum) uranium-series age of about 29 ka by E.L. Begg on bone in basin alluvium mapped by Marchand and Allwardt as the lower unit of the Modesto Formation.
Both soil-sampling localities in the upper member of the Modesto Formation display features which suggest that the surface and soil are within the younger end of the age range of this unit. Site M31 is only 3 m above the modern stream channel (much like

post-Modesto II deposits), and its elevation appears to be somewhat low for the longitudinal profile of the
terrace (fig. 3). The surface of site M46 is located along the projected profile of upper-member terraces (fig. 2), but the terrace is incised into, and somewhat younger than, the extensive eolian phase of the upper member (table 1). Both sites M31 and M46 were
assigned an age of 10 ka, which corresponds to the closing phase of the glacial stage, but the surface and
soils could be anywhere from about 8.2 to 14 ka (table 2).
The age of the lower member of the Modesto Formation is somewhat ambiguous. Marchand and Allwardt (1981, p. 57) referred to the uranium-series
age of 29 ka determined by E.L. Begg as a minimum age for the lower member. Atwater and others (1986),
in their recent work on the Tulare Lake bed,
tentatively correlated it with an early phase of the Tioga glacial deposits of the late Wisconsin glaciation and estimated an age of about 20 to 26 ka. Marchand

A6 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

EXPLANATION
Post-Modesto deposits (Holocene)
Modesto Formation (Pleistocene)-- Consists of: Upper Member--Divided into: Alluvial deposits
Eolian deposits
Basin deposits
Lower Member Divided into: Alluvial deposits
Eolian deposits
Riverbank Formation (Pleistocene)
Turlock Lake Formation (Pleistocene)
North Merced Gravel (Pleistocene or Pliocene)
Laguna Formation (Pliocene) Consists of: China Hat Gravel Member
Lower part
Mehrten Formation (Pliocene and Miocene)
Sedimentary and volcanic rocks, undivided (Tertiary)
Figure 2. Continued
and Allwardt (1981, p. 57) reported a uranium-trend age (Rosholt, 1980) of 95±45 ka on an early Modesto terrace, but this age has been modified because of new calibrations. The revised uranium-trend ages are 42+16 ka for the alluvial terrace (sample M12, fig. 3) and 43+34 ka for the alluvial fan farther downstream (sample M14 of J.N. Rosholt, written commun., 1982). If deposition of the major Sierran streams coincided with the later parts of glacial events, then deposition of the lower member might have coincided with the later part of isotope stage 4, at about 65 ka (Shackleton and Opdyke, 1976). A tentative age of 40 ka was used for terrace deposits of the lower member of the Modesto Formation (table 2), which corresponds to the ages determined by J.N. Rosholt and is in the central part of the estimated age range from 20 to 70 ka.
Riverbank Formation
The Riverbank Formation was divided by Marchand (1976a, b, c, d, e, f; 1977) into three units. The upper unit is separated in the subsurface from the middle and lower units by a disconformity and a buried soil (Marchand and Allwardt, 1981, p. 40). The upper unit was correlated with oxygen-isotope stage 6, on the basis of Marchand's model of sedimentation (Marchand, 1977) and on uranium-trend ages for soil sample R9 of this report (see fig. 3; table 2); its age of 140+40 ka generally coincides with the end of marine oxygen-isotope stage 6 at about 127 ka (Shackleton and Opdyke, 1976). This uranium-trend age, however, does

not overlap the 260+60-ka uranium-trend age of
sample RIO from the middle unit of the Riverbank Formation (table 2), which is compatible with the end
of marine oxygen-isotope stage 8 at about 250 ka (Shackleton and Opdyke, 1976). Hansen and Begg (1970) determined an open-system uranium-series age of about 103 ka on bone from within Riverbank deposits at the Teichert Quarry in the Sacramento Valley (Shlemon, 1967). Marchand and Allwardt (1981,
p. 41) considered this bone to be within the middle unit but that this age should be regarded only as a minimum for the middle unit. Subsequent uranium-trend data on the unit adjacent to the Teichert Quarry yield an age of 120+40 ka (J.N. Rosholt, written commun., 1982). Because the uranium-trend age corresponds to late
Riverbank ages along the Merced River, and because this age does not overlap ages within the middle unit, I
believe that the Teichert unit correlates with the
upper unit of the Riverbank. In this case, the uraniumseries age determined by Hansen and Begg would be a minimum for all units of the Riverbank Formation.
Separation and correlation of the upper and middle units of the Riverbank Formation pose
problems in the Snelling area, where the soils were sampled. Sampling sites are from Marchand and
Allwardt's (1981) "reference section" for the three subunits, but topographic distribution in the study area may be less clear cut than their geologic map indicates. Topographic profiles of the Riverbank terraces (fig. 3) demonstrate that the upper unit is about 2 to 3 m above the middle unit. Because stream profiles appear to converge below the Merced RiverDry Creek confluence, the surfaces near the sampling sites are difficult to separate. The surfaces of sites R9 and R33 appear to be typical of those of stream profiles of the upper unit, but samples R2, RIO, and R32, mapped on the middle unit, occur at low eleva-
tions for the middle unit and could be from either the middle or upper unit. One of Marchand's (1977) mapping criteria for subdivision of the Riverbank Formation is that the middle unit is more extensive than the upper and lower units. Apparent convergence of the terrace at sites R2, RIO, and R32 with an extensive Riverbank surface along Dry Creek (fig. 2)
supports Marchand's original claim that this terrace is one of the middle unit. Differentiation of the Riverbank units is a critical argument for interpreting the soil data because the soils of this study do not notably differ between the middle and upper units.
These soils may be similar because they are developed in similar-age deposits, or the rate of soil development
in this area may have declined after about 100 to 300 ka. If the sampling sites from the upper and middle
units of the Riverbank are actually on the same unit, their age is bracketed by 103 ka as a minimum (Useries age on bone) and by 305 ka as a maximum (oldest U-trend age on the upper and middle units of
the Riverbank). These two units, however, were assigned ages of 130 and 250 ka, respectively (table 2), on the basis of the later parts of oxygen-isotope stages 6 and 8 and on J.N. Rosholt's dating.
A minimum age for the lower unit of the Riverbank Formation appears to be provided by a uranium-trend age of about 260 ka on the middle unit; the maximum age is limited by a K-Ar age of about

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A7

Table 2. Age controls for alluvium in the northeastern San Joaquin Valley, California
[Map units from Marchand and Allwardt (1981). Underscores indicate most reliable ages. Approximate ends of marine oxygen-isotope stages from Shackleton and Opdyke (1976). Comments on reliability of ages compiled since report by Marchand and Allwardt (1981). n.a., not available]

2io.iCfl

Map unit

Soil sample (this study)

Pertinent radiometric ages from the Central Valley (ka)

Stratigraphically above unit
(1 imiting minimum)

Within unit (sample)

Stratigraphically below unit
(1 imiting maximum)

marine oxygen-isotope stages stanp Approximate date of

Other evidence for age control

Approx age of surface
(ka)

Comments

Inferred uncertainty
of age estimate

(sample)

(sample)

Stage

end of stage (ka)

(M

Post-Modesto deposits pmlll

PM15 PM19

pmll

PM8 PM13 PM14
PM15 PM17
PM18

0

n.a.

1 3. 33+0. 06

(Beta-2788)

n.a. 3. 33+0. 06 14.1+0.2

(Beta-2788)

(USGS-38)

'8.23+0.08

(Beta-2787)

In most places, unit pmlll terraces cut into unit pmll.
Unit pmll terraces cut into unit pml, where present.

0.2 Mature oak trees on terraces along the Merced River. Historical flooding suggests a younger age.
3 Historical flooding suggests a younger age, although less flooding than in unit pmlll would
tive age (Marchand and Allwardt, 1981, p. 62).

0-1 1-R.3

Modesto Formation Upper member (m2)

M31 M46

^8.2310.08 (Beta-2787)

"14.110.2 (USGS-38) 7 31±21
(USGS-M31)

'31.24tO.32 °29.407t0.207

2

13

Tulare Lake dam formed 26 ka;

10

Stream profiles sug-

8.3-14

highest lake stand of the

gest that sample

Wisconsin glaciation.

local ities are

within late phase or possibly younger

unit.

Lower member (ml)

Ml 2

^K.ltO.Z

in 29. 407+2. 027

U 103±fi

4

70

Lower member buried or eroded

40

Intermediate between

1 -'-20-70

(USGS-38)

42+16

by upper member in many

available ages.

cn (USGS-M14)

places; argillic horizon

r» (U

suggests that unit ml is significantly older than

unit m2.

i?

Riverbank Formation Upper unit (r3)

R9 R33

13 42. 4+1.0 42+16

ll4 103+6
7 T4T!+TO (USGS-R9) 7 145+ 20 (USGS-R33)

7 ?60±45 (USGS-R10) Ih 615+31

6

Soil separating unit r3 rom units r2 and rl indica es a significant differen e in the age of the unit . At least two units wit strong soils separate unit r3 from unit t2.

130

U-trend age for maximum.

15 103-305

Middle unit (r2) Lower unit (rl)

R2 RIO R32
R30

16 103±6 "103+6

? 260±45 (USGS-R10)
n.a.

^615±31
u 615+31 7 570150

8 10/12

250

Sample sites possibly of

250

Late isotope stage 5.

103-305

same age as for unit r3.

U-trend age for

maximum.

330

Older than unit r2 or r3.

330 Late isotope stage 10. 1 '250-570

U-trend age for

maximum.

Turlock Lake Formation Upper unit (t2)

T2 T6
Til

"103±6

18 615±31
L '570150 (USGS-T6)

19 3, 000-4 ,000 2 -730

16

600 U-trend age for mini- P 570-615 mum.

Laguna Formation China Hat Gravel Member (Ich).

CH1 CH2
CH3

Ir 615i6 ^730

n.a.

23 3, 000-4, 000

3,000

730-4,000

1 ^*C age on wood in core 3 to 4 m below unit pmll and pmlll surfaces along the lower San Joaquin River.
2 Qn upper member of the Modesto Formation (B.F. Atwater, unpub. data, 1983). 3 **C age on charcoal of oxbow-lake deposit that appears to be cut by unit pmll and pmlll deposits of the lower San Joaquin River (B.F. Atwater, unpub. data, 1983). ^B.F. Atwater (unpub. data, 1983). 5 0n charcoal beneath unit m2 fan on the Kern River (Marchand and Allwardt, 1981). 6 0n wood in deposits of the lower San Joaquin River beneath unit m2 and ml fans along the Tuol-
umne River (B.F. Atwater, unpub. data, 1983; Atwater and others, in press). 7 J.N. Rosholt (unpub. data, 1984). 8 E.G. Begg (oral commun., 1980) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981). 'Marchand and Allwardt (1981). 10 U-series age on bone at top of unit ml (E.G. Begg, oral commun., 1980; Marchand and Allwardt,
1981); Atwater and others (in press) estimate an age of 20 to 25 ka. "Hansen and Begg (1970) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981). 12 Upper uncertainty bound of 70 ka corresponds to both the end of isotope stage 7 and the limit-
ing age of the informally designated West Lake silt of Atwater and others (in press).

1J B.F. Atwater (unpub. data, 1983) and Atwater and others (in press^ . '"'U-series age (Atwater and others, in press) cited by Marchand and Allwardt (1981) as within unit r2 deposit; correspondence with U-trend ages suggests that deposit is of unit r3. ' c Upper uncertainty bound of 305 ka is U-trend maximum age on unit r2. 16 Dalrymple (1980) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981). 17 Upper uncertainty bound of 570 ka is U-trend minimum age on unit t2. 18 K-Ar age on ash at base of unit t2 (Dalrymple, 1980; Marchand and Allwardt, 1981). "Limiting age on Hemphillian fauna in Stratigraphically lower unit (Marchand and Allwardt,
1981). 20 Lower uncertainty bound of 570 ka is U-trend minimum age on unit t2. ?1 U-trend age that may indicate age of the surface and soil (J.N. Rosholt, unpub. data,
1984). ''Gilbert-Gauss boundary age on lower unit of the Turlock Lake Formation (Shackleton and Op-
dyke, 1976). - 3 Age of Hemphillian fauna found in the Stratigraphically lower Mehrten Formation. ?l*Age corresponds to date of magnetic reversal in lower unit of the Turlock Lake Formation,
assumed to be the Gilbert-Gauss boundary.

225 200 175 150 - 125

EXPLANATION

Post Modesto deposits
Modesto Formation upper member lower member

pm3 A pm2 *
m2 o ml

Riverbank Formation upper unit middle unit lower unit

r3 o r2 o
r1

Turlock Lake Formation (not shown) Laguna Formation
China Hat Gravel Member Ich x All sample localities capitalized

CH3 CH2>
CH1X

> 100 75

50

M46 ___-" " ~ ~ . - -zf~

f CONFLUENCE OF DRY CREEK DRAINAGE

25

\PM15

t MERCED RIVER PROFILE

0

1RA2

PM19 MRA3

HORIZONTAL SCALE -1:250,000 VERTICAL EXAGGERATION X 200

Figure 3. Profiles of Merced River terraces, showing sample localities (see supp. table 1).

750 700

600

500

t
LL
2

2 400 O

<

§
LLJ
300

200

100

615 ka (Janda, 1965, 1966; Dalrymple, 1980) on ash within the Turlock Lake Formation, and by a uraniumtrend age of 570150 ka for the upper unit of the Turlock Lake. Marchand (1977) and Marchand and Allwardt (1981) correlated the lower unit with oxygenisotope stage 10 but suggested that this unit could also correlate with stage 12. A tentative age of 330 ka was used for this study (table 2) to generally coincide with the later part of marine oxygen-isotope stage 10 of Shackleton and Opdyke (1976).
Turlock Lake Formation
At least two units compose the Turlock Lake Formation; they are separated by a well-developed buried soil at exposures near the town of Friant and in roadcuts near Turlock Lake (Marchand and Allwardt, 1981, p. 26-27). This study includes soil samples from only the upper unit of the Turlock Lake because there are no surface exposures of the lower unit. Janda (1965, 1966) found a pumiceous ash at the base of, and conformable with, the upper unit of the Turlock Lake. This ash, now called the Friant Pumice Member of the Turlock Lake Formation, provides a maximum age for the deposit and has a K-Ar age of 615+31 ka (Dalrymple, 1980). In addition, uranium-trend ages of about 570 and 610 ka (table 2), may indicate ages for about the upper 3 m of the deposit and thus for the surface and soil.

Sampling sites for soils of the upper unit of the Turlock Lake Formation are located along the Tuolumne River where the deposits and surfaces are well defined by mapping criteria. The surface of the upper unit of the Turlock Lake is dissected, and although samples were collected on relatively flat topographic highs, the soils could have been partly eroded. Janda (1965) proposed that dissection of the surface occurred during deposition of the Riverbank Formation, and so the soils of the Turlock Lake deposits would have developed for a few hundred thousand years before dissection and partial erosion occurred.
China Hat Gravel Member of the Laguna Formation
The China Hat Gravel Member of the Laguna Formation, the oldest unit in the study area, occurs as a remnant of a late Tertiary gravel deposit of the Merced River near the town of Snelling (fig. 2). The gradient of the China Hat deposits along the Merced River is considerably steeper than those of younger alluvial units (fig. 3), and paleochannels in the China Hat Gravel Member have a more southerly trend than those in younger alluvial units (Marchand, 1977, p. 3941).
A maximum age for the China Hat Gravel Member is provided by a vertebrate fauna of latest Hemphillian age (3,000-4,000 ka) from the underlying

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A9

Miocene and Pliocene Mehrten Formation (Marchand

and Allwardt 1981, p. 19). Wahrhaftig and Sir man

(1965, p. 314, table 2) and Marchand and Allwardt

(1981, p. 19) correlated the China Hat Gravel Member

with the Pliocene Tuscan Formation in the Sacramento

Valley, which includes the Nomlaki Tuff Member,

dated at about 3,300 ka near its base. Marchand and

Allwardt (1981, p. 19) also correlated the China Hat

with gravel deposits in the Kings River, which contain

basalt clasts about 3,800 ka old (Huber, 1981, p.

1194). Furthermore, Marchand and Allwardt (1981, p.

19) and Busacca (1982) discussed a magnetic reversal

discovered by K.L. Verosub within the Laguna

Formation in the Sacramento Valley and tentatively

assigned it to the Gilbert Reversed/Gauss Normal

Polarity Chrons boundary, at about 3,400 ka. For this

study, an age of 3,000 ka was used for the surface; this

age is constrained between about 730 ka (magnetic

reversal within the younger North Merced Gravel) and

4,000 ka (Hemphillian fossil in the next oldest unit, the

Mehten Formation) (table 2).

Soils found in the China Hat deposits were

sampled on the flat, relatively uneroded tops of

surface remnants.

Mima-mound topography

(Nikiforoff, 1941) is ubiquitous across the terrace

surface, and soils were sampled at the tops of the

mounds. Soil excavations revealed many filled animal

burrows of different ages, as evidenced by varying

degrees of redness, hardness, and clay-film develop-

ment (see supp. table 1). Gopher activity probably

played an important role in the formation of these

mounds (Arkley and Brown, 1954). Concentric collapse

features were also observed all along a depression

(intermound area), suggesting collapse related to

chemical loss or to ground-water dissolution

(Nikiforoff, 1941).

As discussed above, there are considerable

uncertainties in the dating of these surfaces. The

uncertainties in both age estimates of the surfaces and

in variation of the soils are shown schematically by

horizontal and vertical error bars in figures 6, 7, 10,

and 11.

Provenance for Merced River deposits
Deposits along the Merced River were chosen for this study to limit the variation in mineralogy of the soil parent material. The Merced River drains about 600 km of granitic terrane of the Sierra Nevada and about 150 km of metamorphic and marine sedimentary rocks of the Sierra Nevada foothills.
Holocene alluvium along the Merced River has a larger component of mafic minerals than do older alluvial units, apparently in relation to a climatic control of erosion in the Merced River drainage basin. Janda (1966) discussed the relation of erosion rates in the Sierra Nevada and foothills to the origin of alluvium along the major Sierran streams. Under glacial conditions, most of the erosion and, thus, the sediment supply is from the glaciated headwaters of major Sierran streams. Under interglacial conditions and, possibly, during transitions into or out of glacial events, more erosion takes place in the Sierran foot-

hills, which is underlain mainly by metavolcanic and metasedimentary rocks.
Janda's (1966) conclusions are borne out by the higher content of mafic minerals in Holocene deposits along the Merced River. Some mineralogic and chemical trends of the soils developed in Merced River alluvium suggest that the Holocene deposits contain more metamorphic (foothill derived) debris in comparison with the older units. In general, metamorphic rocks of the foothills contain more pyroxene and less zircon than do granodiorites of the Sierra Nevada (Roger, 1966), and the pyroxene/zircon ratio of C horizons is much higher for Holocene (younger than 10 ka) than for older soils (fig. 4). Etching categories of some of the heavy minerals also indicate unusual characteristics of the Holocene soils. In older soils, increase in etching with age indicates systematic weathering of consecutively older units. Clinopyroxene and hornblende grains, however, are more etched in late Holocene than in early Holocene soils (fig. 5), a difference which may indicate that the late Holocene deposits have inherited etched grains from previously weathered sources. The Holocene soils also contain unusually large amounts of total Mg, exchangeable Mg and H, smectites, and oxalateextractable and total Fe, and have high ratios of fine to total clay (see supplementary tables), which suggest reworking of previously weathered materials rich in ferromagnesian rocks of the foothills.
EVALUATION OF SOIL DEVELOPMENT
Site selection and sampling criteria
Sampling sites had to meet the following requirements to be included in this chronosequence study. Ideally, sites had not been cultivated, had 0- to 3percent slopes, showed no active erosion, were on well-drained, sandy alluvium, and had a grassland vegetation. The requirement that excluded the largest area was cultivation. Most of the eastern San Joaquin Valley is intensely cultivated, typically including grading of surfaces, plowing of the upper half-meter of soil, and addition of large amounts of fertilizers, herbicides, and other soil amendments. All sampling sites in the study area were free from major grading, some sites had been farmed lightly, and all sites had been grazed by livestock at some time in the historical past.
q Although alluviation along major streams may have coincided with Holocene glaciations in response to climatic fluctuations (Marchand and Allwardt, 1981), alluvial deposits in the valley were probably derived primarily from the metamorphic rocks in the foothills. Several late Holocene moraines are still confined to the high alpine areas on the west slope of the Sierra Nevada (Curry, 1969; Yount and others, 1982), and preservation of these moraines indicates that the granitic debris was not captured by western drainages.

A10 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

10

pm3

pm2 m2 ml r3 HOLOCENE | PLEISTOCENE
RELATIVE AGE

r2

Figure 4. Ratio of pyroxene to zircon grains in the very fine sand fraction of C horizons of Merced soils. See table 2 for map units; data listed in supplementary table 4.

4.2 -
3.6
LU ^ O (/) /rj 3.0
Z I O h- 2 4 -
LU
1.8 ~

Z
z z
h
h h
pm3

Z

Z

Z
Z Zh
zh zz zz
hh h h

h hZ
z zh z
hh
h

h h

pm2 m2 ml r3 r2 HOLOCENE | PLEISTOCENE

RELATIVE AGE

Z h h h
Z Z
t2

Figure 5. Etching scale of hornblende (h) and zircon (Z) grains from the very fine sand fraction of Merced soils. Etching scale after Gillam and others (1977).

Another requirement that excluded many potential sites was internal (vertical) drainage. Many soils in the Central Valley have hardpans cemented by carbonates, iron oxides, or silica that greatly affect the movement of soil water. Such hardpans may have formed as a result of initial stratification or drainage boundaries in the soil parent material (Marchand, 1976a; Harden and Marchand, 1977). Soils with hardpans were avoided in this study so as to compare only well-drained soils. All sites were sampled on topo-
graphic highs with slopes of 0 to 3 percent. Further requirements of uniform vegetation and
uniform parent-material texture were generally met, as outlined in figure 2 and generalized below for the

study area. Sampling pits were excavated by backhoe or by hand, or sampled along a roadcut or bluff (in which case the site was dug at least a meter inward
from the exposed vertical cut). Soils were sampled at least to the depth of the B3 (BC) horizons. Soils were
described in the field (Soil Survey staff, 1962) and analyzed for several chemical, physical, and mineralogic properties; most of the analyses were described in detail by Singer and Janitsky (1986):

Soil-forming factor

Description

Climate
VegetationTopography Parent materialAge (ka)

Xeric moisture regime (mean annual precipitation, 30 cm), thermic temperature regime (mean annual temperature, 16 °C).
Perennial, annual grasses, scattered oaks (Quercus lobata).
Topographic highs, 0- to 3percent slopes.
Sand-loamy texture, granitic composition.
0.2-3,000

Assumptions and methods
Some important limitations affect the interpretation of a soil chronosequence. Soil-forming factors other than time differ among the sampling sites, and so the differences in soils would be due not only to age but also to differences in other factors. If the variations in other factors is random within the chronosequence, then trends with increasing age are dominated by time rather than by other factors. For example, if precipitation at the sampling sites increased covariantly with age, then soil differences are due not only to age but also to the precipitation gradient. In the study area, precipitation increases slightly with the age of these soils, but this effect is thought to be minimal. Random differences in soilforming factors (other than time) among the sampling sites might be an important source of soil variations, and accounting for these variations is likely to improve
the age trends. A similar complexity in a chronosequence is
climatic change over time; older soils might have undergone more variations in climate, as well as drier or wetter climates, in comparison with younger soils. In the study area, soils older than those of the upper member of the Modesto Formation underwent at least one full glacial-to-interglacial cycle, and successively older soils underwent successively more cycles an attribute of cumulative frequency and not necessarily one of differences in inherent precipitation. Because Holocene soils were developed only in Holocene, interglacial climates, important climate-related differences may exist between Holocene and pre-
Holocene soils.

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California All

Reference to soil processes and pathways of soil development may be misleading if only chronosequence data are considered. For example, a soil property such as clay content may change systematically with age, but older soils may have had clay forming in place, whereas younger soils may have received clay from flood deposits. In addition, the systematicness of a plot of a soil property versus age does not necessarily reflect a continuous process. Because the deposits in this study were apparently generated during similar (late) phases in a climatic cycle, stepwise functions or some other pathway of soil development (such as the "soil-forming intervals" proposed by Morrison, 1967) would not be evident simply from age plots of soil properties. As Yaalon (1975) emphasized, the use of chronosequences to decipher pathways of soil genesis would be improved by smaller increments between the ages of deposits. The rates of soil or soil-property development are useful, but only as an empirical measure of cumulative processes. In figures 6, 7, and 9 through 12, the term "age" rather than "time" is used on the x.-axis to emphasize this shortcoming.
Uncertainty in the numerical ages affects the correlation between soil properties and age; this uncertainty is large in most cases (a factor of 2 is typical). The uncertainty, expressed as a percentage, differs between age groups and generally is not centered about the best-estimate ages, and so the errors are not symmetrical. Several different graphical and numerical approaches are used to represent age uncertainties and their bearing on interpretation.
Laboratory-measurement error is small in comparison with the natural soil variation represented by replicate soils on a given terrace (Harden, 1982b; Singer and Janitzky, 1986). As a result, by analyzing replicate soils on given deposits, soil variation encompasses the smaller laboratory error.
Trends of soil development with increasing age
Some soil properties develop rapidly or regularly within a given age interval, before or after which the properties decline or do not develop with age, or show irregular age trends (figs. 6, 7). Possible intermittent action of soil processes over long timespans results in a time dependence of soil-property development. Soil properties are discussed below according to the processes that may be time dependent, although such time dependence is hypothetical and limited by the numerous assumptions discussed above.
Clay content, rubification (figs. 6_A, 6B), iron oxide content (fig. 7C) and the soil-development index (explained in detail for these soils by Harden, 1982a) increase throughout the 3,000-ka age span of these soils. These four properties increase most strikingly at first, then increase more slowly during later stages (older units) of soil development. Soil-property curves are bowl shaped if plotted against age on a log scale, and straighten when plotted as log (soilHog (age) functions. Development of these properties is clearly nonlinear over such long timespans.
For young (as old as 10 ka) deposits of the Merced area, organic-matter content increases with

soil age. Soils of this age range can be differentiated

on the basis of their carbon content and by darkening

and thickening of the A horizons, represented by

melanization (fig. 6C!). Although all soil character-

istics vary somewhat, owing to stratification of the

alluvium, strata in the upper meter are mixed by biotic

(animals and plant roots) and mineralogic (swelling of

grains) processes and weather fluctuations (freeze-

thaw, shrink-swell). After about 10 ka, organic-carbon

content and melanization generally decline irregularly

with age, possibly in relation to a decline in soil

fertility and in response to the climatic changes that

are inherent in the trends of older soils.

After stabilization of the surface, soil

structure forms (see supp. table 1), and peds become

harder or firmer as binding agents develop, such as

sesquioxides and organic matter. Buildup of binding

agents is evident from the increase in hardness as

measured by dry consistence of soils younger than

about 100 ka (fig. 6D). Most of the structure and

hardness in young (Holocene) soils develop in the A

horizons, whereas in older (Pleistocene) soils, further

changes occur mostly in the B horizons. After about

100 to 600 ka of soil development, consistence and

structure apparently reach a maximum state of

development, whereafter structure and consistence

generally decline unsystematically. Commensurate

with the development of consistence and structure in

these soils, bulk density begins to increase within a

few hundred years of surface stabilization, and then

reaches a maximum after about 100 to 300 ka (see

supp. table 2).

4

Properties related to clay formation and trans-

location and to soil acidity develop most noticeably in

soils older than about 100 ka. Although the total clay

content increases in both young and old soils (fig. 6JJ),

morphologic evidence for increase in clay content is

unclear until sometime between about 10 and 100 ka,

as indicated by increases in clay films (fig. 7J3) and

total texture. Soil acidity, indicated by pH lowering in

figure 7D, develops mostly between about 600 and

3,000 ka. Most physical and morphologic properties appear

to be unaffected by mineralogic differences in the

parent materials, as evidenced by smooth, systematic

age curves through the Holocene to Pleistocene. Some

soil parameters, however, particularly those measured

by chemical analyses, appear to be highly sensitive to

the mineralogic differences between deposits. Age

trends of dith ion ite-ex tractable Fe (fig. 7C!)

demonstrate the difference between Holocene and pre-

Holocene deposits. Most chemical analyses must be

evaluated separately for these two age groups because

the parent materials differ. Although the totalchemical analyses are discussed below only for

Pliocene and Pleistocene age ranges, the same

processes clearly must have occurred during the

Holocene as well (there have been considerable

Increase of kaolinite content over time suggests that this clay mineral is forming in these soils (see
supp. table 4).

A1Z Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

300 01
<O
CJ 200
100 o (/)

1.2
c

10 2 10 4 AGE, IN YEARS

10 6

10 s 1.8 -

10 2 10 4 AGE, IN YEARS

10 6

10 8

0.8 S 1.2

201
01 0.4
Occ.
Q.

cc.
Q 0.6
O cc. o.

10 2 10 4 AGE, IN YEARS

10 6

010 £

10 2 10 4 AGE, IN YEARS

10 e

10 6

Figure 6. Examples of soil properties that develop over long timespans (A, B) and for initial timespans (Cj D). _A, Rubification. J3, Clay content. C_, Melanization. D, Dry consistence. Points and numbers indicate number of samples and best-estimate ages. Vertical

dimension of boxes indicates one standard deviation for replicate soil profiles on same surface; horizontal dimension indicates total age uncertainty (table 2). Field properties in figures 6^ 6C_, and 6D^ from Harden (1982a).

transformations in the youngest Pleistocene soil, which shows no evidence of reworked, preweathered parent material).

major-elemental composition of the A-horizon silt plus clay are used to demonstrate the methods used for data interpretation.

Major- and trace-element chemistry
Two size fractions, 2 mm (whole soil) and silt plus clay (fine), were separated and analyzed for total amounts of major and trace elements. Major elemental oxides were determined by X-ray fluorescence (see supp. tables 5, 6), and trace elements were determined by instrumental neutron activation (see supp. tables 7, 8). The composition of the sand fraction was also determined by calculating the difference between the whole-soil and fine fractions. Samples chosen for analysis generally include the lowermost Al horizon, the B horizon containing the most clay, and the lowermost C horizon. Trends in

Relative rates of element loss
The concentrations of major elements change profoundly over the 3,000-ka age span of these soils. Greater understanding of these changes requires that actual losses or gains of an element be distinguished from apparent changes caused by the opposite loss or gain of other constituents. Two methods were devised to determine the losses and gains of elements over time. The first method, referred to as the accumulation-series method, examines elemental ratios over time; the second method, referred to as the net-loss method, uses Merrill's (1906) loss equation, in which a stable constituent and a standard are defined for

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A13

01 DC
3
X ,,
LU 2

-B iE 2

^/_ 9 _______ c
10 2 10 4 AGE, IN YEARS

10 6

10

-5 B 102 10 4
AGE, IN YEARS

10 6

DC . LU
o kj EI
LU H QQ LU
t D. Z CO
fiO ^ 2
o-

ir

0

10 2 10 AGE, IN YEARS

10

or
UJ
2
I
Q.
O2
DC O.
10 fc

I_____i
102 10 4
AGE, IN YEARS

10 6

Figure 7. Examples of soil properties that show changes after 100 ka. Aj Total texture. IJ, Clay films. Cj Dithionite-extractable Fe. Dj pH lowering. Vertical dimension of boxes indicates one standard deviation for replicate soils on deposit; horizontal dimension of box indicates total age uncertainty (table 2). Field properties in figures 7 A_ and 7B^ from Harden (1982a).

calculating actual losses (positive values) or gains (negative loss values) of other constituents. Both methods allow for net loss or net sain of elements.
Methods for an accumulation series of elemental oxides
In the accumulation-series method (fig. 8), a ratio of two elements is tested for significant increases or decreases with age. The order of

accumulation or depletion of elements is obtained by
comparing the concentration of each element to that of every other element in a ratio and by tabulating the consecutive order of accumulation or depletion. The term "accumulation" is used here because it can mean
net gain or only apparent gain by loss of other constituents. Net depletion or dilution by other elements can also cause relative accumulations. Rank correlation is used to test the age trends in which elemental ratios
and age are both ranked from low to high categories. The (ranked) elemental ratio is then regressed against the (ranked) age. In this case, only the relative age

A14 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Spearman's rho coefficient for rank ratio versus rank age

NUMERATOR

Si Al Fe

Ca Na

Ti Zr

Si ... -0.369 0.033 -0.567 -0.758 -0.680 -0.649 0.313 -0.805

Al .369

.651 -.563 -.767 -.641 .056 .707 .129

Fe -.033 -.651 ... -.615 -.770 -.661 -.565 .217 .078

Mg .567 .563 .615

-.662 -.263 .483 .565 .500

Ca .758 .767 .770 .662

-.683 -.773 .771 .675

Na .680 .641 .661 .263 -.683

.605 .662 .714

K .649 -.056 .565 -.483 -.773 -.605

.670 .609

Tl -.313 -.707 -.217 -.565 -.771 -.662 -.670

-.075

Zr .805 -.129 -.078 -.500 -.675 -.714 -.609 .075

NUMERATOR

Accumulated relative to numerator

Depleted relative to numerator

Ti.Fe
Fe.Al.Si Zr,Mn,P,Ti ,K,Na,Mg,Fe,Al ,Si
Zr.P.Ti ,K,Fe,Fe,Al ,Si Zr.Ti ,Fe,Si

Mg,Ca,Na,K,Mn,Zr Mg.Ca.Na Al ,Mg,Ca,Na,K,Mn Ca.Ti.P (K.Zr)
Ca Mg.Ca.Na

Ti,Fe>Al>K>Mg,Na>Ca Si>K
Figure 8. Example of method for deriving an accumulation series for relative rates of element loss or gain. Aj Element ratios for A-horizon fine fraction, ranked and regressed against ranked age for Spearman's rho correlation. B, Element ratios listed as accumulated or depleted if significant at 5-percentconfidence level (r_>0.66). Numbers in parentheses, significant at 5- to 10-percent-confidence level. Cj Series tabulated for relative rates of accumulation, with highest rates to left or most depleted to right.
must be known to determine the relative rates of element loss. The resulting correlation, or Spearman's rho coeffiecient (Tate and Clelland, 1957), is then a test for whether or not the elemental ratio changes significantly with relative age. Figure 8 illustrates this procedure. If an elemental ratio increases significantly with age, then the element in the numerator is said to accumulate relative to the element in denominator. A decreasing ratio indicates the reverse; if the ratio does not change significantly over time, the trend is not considered to be pedologically significant.

A constant ratio would infer that the elements are lost or gained at the same rate. Typically, however, when ratios do not change significantly with age, there is considerable scatter in the regression. Such scatter is likely to be caused by parent-material
variation; therefore, statistical tests consider only significant changes with age.

For the silt-plus-clay fraction of the A horizons,
Spearman's rho coefficients were determined for each (ranked) elemental ratio versus (ranked) age. For each element, the correlations of its ratio to the other elements are evaluated. If the ratio changes significantly (at the 5-percent-confidence level), then the relative loss or gain is tabulated (fig. 8B) by listing decreases with age to the right and increases to the left of the numerator (center column, fig. 8B). Elements listed to the right may be lost more rapidly or gained more slowly than a given element; elements listed to the left are either lost more slowly or gained more rapidly than the given element. The accumulation series of all elements is then tallied with accumulated or concentrated constituents to the left of other elements. For the A-horizon silt-plus-clay
fraction, Fe, Ti, Si, and Al increase, and the alkalineearth elements are depleted, relative to Zr (a stable constituent; fig. 8C).

Methods for calculating loss percents of elemental oxides
Rates of element loss or gain can also be determined by using Merrill's (1906) loss equation, in which a stable or resistant species and an unweathered parent material are used as standards to monitor net changes in other constituents. For relative rates of element loss, the slopes of regression equations are used from correlating percent loss with age. Estimates of real percent loss can also be made, although many assumptions and limitations are used in these estimates.
Using the equation of Merrill (1906) for percent loss, and using Zr as the resistant species, Ca loss from the A horizons can be estimated as follows:

Ca

loss

=

CapmZrA. _-__C_aA.Zr pm CapmZrA.

where pm signifies the parent material and A the A horizon.
For this study, Zr was used as the resistant species, and sample M12 was used as the parent material for all soils. Zr appears to be the most stable constituent, as indicated by its concentration in sand separates relative to the decreases in most other
elements (see supp. tables 5-8). This stability is commensurate with the consistently low etching index of zircon grains in soils of various age (see supp. table 4). Barshad (1964), Wild (1961), Sudom and St. Arnaud
(1971), and Busacca (1982) also found that Zr and zircon grains in soils are relatively resistant to loss and mobility. Given the resistance of Zr, element percent loss can be estimated by using Zr as a resistant species and by using a soil standard that represents the parent material. The Cl horizon of a soil from the lower member of the Modesto Formation (sample M12, from 20.1- to 23.1-cm depth) was chosen as the parent material for all soils because most soils were not sampled deep enough to reach relatively unweathered C horizons.

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A15

Use of a single parent material has the following advantages: (1) all data are normalized to a given
standard; and (2) when element loss is plotted against
age, the slopes of the curves do not change if the standard is changed. Thus, the estimated rates are good approximations that will change only when age uncertainties are considered. The disadvantages of using a single sample for the parent material are that (1) minor variations in parent material are not represented by the calculation; and (2) the intercepts, or estimates of loss percents, are not so valid because they depend on the chosen parent material. Mineralogic and chemical compositions of parent materials are assumed to be similar for Merced soils older than Holocene. Any variations among parent materials are most likely random and thus will increase scatter in the regression analysis. Holocene soils are not included because of compositional differences, and soils from the middle unit of the Riverbank Formation are omitted to ensure the correct order of ages (relative age).
Uncertainty of age estimates is a more complex problem for regressions of percent-loss calculations. Whereas relative age is established by the sequence of terraces, quantitative age can be listed only as a range (table 2). Most significantly, the uncertainty varies among the different deposits (as indicated by boxes in figs. 6 and 7). To determine the extent to which this uncertainty in age affects the correlation between chemical losses and age, the ages of units were

allowed to vary within their constraints, and the resulting effects on regression were determined. If the slopes of the regressions maintain a similar order for all elements, then regression techniques can decipher relative rates of element loss by using best-
estimate, assigned ages (table 2). Otherwise, relative rates of loss must rely on the accumulation-series method, using rank regression.
Ages of the different pre-Holocene units were varied for different regression analyses to test how age uncertainties affect the calculated rates of element loss. In table 3, these tests include various combinations of minimum and maximum ages, as well as the best-estimate age assignments listed in table
2. In general, the combinations chosen include those of maximum constraints on young ages with minimum
constraints on old ages for finding maximum slopes, and the reverse (minimums for young and maximums
for old) for minimum slopes. This technique is used in later sections of this report to estimate rates of soil
development. Regardless of the combination of possible ages
used in regression (table 3), the order of slopes remains the same for percent loss. One exception is the order
of Ca and Na loss, but these rates are so close that the differences are probably insignificant. For ordering
the rates of loss, then, it is valid to use the relative order of slopes from regression of percent loss versus best-estimate age. Such regressions probably would be invalid if the relative age order were uncertain.

Table 3. Variation in rates of element loss from the A-horizon silt-plus-clay fraction, when age uncertainties are considered
[Ages used for trials: 1, best-estimate ages; 2 and 3, best-estimate ages with one young and one old constraint; 4 through 7, combined young, old, and bestestimate ages (see table 2). Rates vary by a factor of about 1.7. _S, standard deviation of predicted y_ values]

Age used for trial (ka)

Map unit

ml 40 70 40 20 70 20 70

r3 130 130 130 130 130 103 250

rl 330 330 330 330 330 250 440

t2 600 600 600 600 600 570 615

CH

3,000

3,000

1,000

4,000

4,000

4,000

1,000

Element

Regression

ange in rates (trial)

Al (£=8)
Ca (_n=8)
Mg (_n=8)
Fe (_n=8)
Na (_n=8)

Slope y-intercept r I
Slope y-intercept
i
Slope j^-intercept
I
Slope y-intercept T2
I
Slope ^-intercept r2
1

percent/logjg yr percent loss .01 percent percent loss
percent/logjo yr percent loss .01 percent percent loss
percent/logjQ yr percent loss .01 percent percent loss
percent/1 ogjfj yr percent loss .01 percent percent loss
percent/1 og 10 yr percent loss .01 percent percent loss

0.213 -1.05
.572 .11
.412 -1.83
.740 .15
.319 -1.25
.594 .16
.124 -.452
.621 .06
.405 -.208
.691 .167

0.249 -1.26
.651 .10
.458 -2.10
.758 .15
.354 -1.45
.606 .16
.140 -.545
.656 .06
.459 -2.39
.736 .15

0.223 -1.09
.432 .13
.460 -2.07
.633 .18
.358 -1.45
.517 .18
.136 -.526
.537 .066
.436 -2.22
.550 .20

0.170 -.804
.506 .12
.343 -1.44
.714 .16
.266 -.949
.574 .17
.101 -.326
.582 .06
.333 -1.67
.650 .18

0.171 -.805
.537 .12
.340 -1.41
.730 .15
.264 -.927
.590 .16
.099 -.312
.582 .063
.333 -1.65
.675 .172

0.278 -1.40
.517 .12
.537 -2.50
.664 .17
.418 -1.78
.540 .173
.165 -.676
.585 .06
.521 -2.70
.603 .19

0.267 -1.36
.360 .14
.588 -2.84
.605 .19
.458 -2.05
.493 .18
.173 -.738
.490 .07
.548 -2.90
.508 .21

0.170 (4) to 0.278 (6) 0.340 (5) to 0.588 (7) 0.264 (5) to 0.458 (7) 0.099 (5) to 0.173 (7) 0.333 (4, 5) to 0.548 (7)

A16 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Regression lines and best-estimate ages were also used to order the rates of element loss in other size fractions of the A and B horizons (fig. 9; table 4).
Resulting orders of rates of element loss
The accumulation-series and net-loss methods generally agree on the relative order of element loss. For example, for the A-horizon fine fraction, the order is Ti, Fe > Al > K > Mn > Na > Ca by the accumulationseries method and Si > Zr > K > Mn > Na > Ca by the netloss method. The major difference in these two methods is that the net-loss method lists fewer elements, because it relies only on the significance of ratios with Zr versus time. In general, alkaline-earth elements are lost more rapidly than sesquioxides. Al is added more slowly to this fraction than Fe, as a result of either faster Fe dissolution of the sand fraction or more rapid incorporation into the fine fraction, in comparison with Al. The poor correlation of Zr ratios seen in the accumulation series (fig. 8_A) suggests that although there are distinguishable differences in losses of Ti, Al, and Fe based on interrelations of these elements, Zr may not serve as a good index for monitoring their net loss. Indeed, Zr may not be truly stable, and so small losses or even gains of Zr into the silt or clay fraction would make the ratio correlation indeterminant. Relative to Al, there is a net gain of Ti and Fe. The increase in dithionite-extractable Fe over time (fig. 7C_) verifies that Fe tends to be sustained in this fraction. Mabee (1978) found that magnetite grains incorporate Ti into the soils sampled in this study, an observation that explains the influx of Ti into this fraction relative to Al and, possibly, Fe.
The order of element loss varies among size fractions and horizons (table 4) in relation to processes of dissolution, translocation, and size fractionation. In the sand fraction of B horizons (fig. 9; table 4), the order of element loss is: Zr (most resistant) <Si<Al, K<Na<Ca. Cementation of fine particles into sandsize grains is not evident in these soils, and so the elements in the sand fraction are an index of the relative retention of elements by primary mineral grains, or, in other words, an index of dissolution. Mineral grains generally release Ca, Mg, and Na more readily than Si, Al, and K, and (or) minerals rich in Ca, Mg, and Na are more easily weathered than those rich in Si, Al, and K. There may be a net gain of Ti and, possibly, Fe into the sands via the magnetic grains
(Mabee 1978), but there is no systematic change over time of either element relative to Zr.
In contrast to the order of element loss from the sand fraction, the silt-plus-clay fraction of B horizons gains Al, Ti, Fe, and Si (table 4). These elements may be weathering from sand grains and upper soil horizons and reprecipitating in the B-horizon clays. Clay mineralogy (see supp. table 4) indicates a regular increase of kaolinite over time. Although the mineralogy explains the influx of Al into the fine fraction, there is no strong evidence for desilication of the illite-dominated parent material. The influx of Ti can be explained by incorporation into both magnetite and octahedral layers of clays (Barshad, 1953), possibly in the abundant vermuculite clays (see supp. table 4).

The relative order of element loss from the lessthan-2-mm fraction in B horizons is generally similar to that in the sand fraction, where Zr > Fe > Al > Na > Ca>Mg (percent-loss method, table 4). If, indeed, there are net losses of Fe and Al in the less-than-2mm fraction, they are due mostly to dissolution of sand grains, because there are net gains of these elements in the silt-plus-clay fraction. The relative loss of Ca and Na is similar to that in the sand but different from that in the fine fraction (percent-loss method, table 4), possibly owing to incorporation of Na into secondary compounds or minerals. Silica is lost more readily from sand than is Al (accumulation-series method, table 4), but the reverse is true for the fine fraction. Thus, enrichment of Al in the whole soil is due to rates of Al and Si enrichment of clays rather than to rates of Al and Si release from sands.
Several other studies have estimated the relative rates of element loss, and despite differences in their methodologies, their results are nearly identical to those of this study. Comparing fresh to weathered rock or less-than-2-mm soil, Steidtmann (1908) concluded that Al is concentrated (gained more rapidly or lost more slowly) at higher rates than Fe, although Goldich (1938) found the reverse to be true. Both of these reports found that Si is intermediate in rate of loss between the sesquioxides (Fe and Al) and Na, Mg, and Ca. Because Si constitutes more than 60 percent of the elemental analyses, volumes of Si loss could be substantial. Although the losses of Na, Mg, and Ca were greater than those of other elements, their relative order varied among the studies and was related in part to the composition of the parent rock. Colman (1982) found similar rates of accumulation or loss in basalt and andesite, where Ti>Fe>K>Al>Si> Mg>Na>Ca.
This study generally confirms the conclusions of other workers, although the approach differs somewhat. The previous work compared one weathered sample to the parent material, whereas in this study the element-loss series is based on five different-age samples plus a parent material. The advantage of comparing several different-age samples is evident in figure 9. Using only the oldest sample for the less-than-2-mm fraction (fig. 9), Ca is apparently lost more readily than Na or Mg; but using the rates of loss for all pre-Holocene soils, Mg is actually lost most readily. Another advantage of this study over previous ones is in the separation of the size fractions. As discussed above, the less-than-2-mm soil fraction demonstrates that Fe and Al are lost relatively slowly; analysis of the sand and fine fractions shows that these low rates are due both to slow release of Fe and Al from the sand fraction and to slow release and reprecipitation of sesquioxides in the silt-plus-clay fraction. Although mechanisms in these two size fractions are probably interdependent, comparison of the rates in separate fractions is a step closer to understanding the causes of chemical differentiation in soils.
Estimating rates of soil development
The number and age span of surfaces and soils and their associated ages invite calculations of soil-

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A17

10 AGE, IN YEARS

SO 0 en N
Q°-J ^O i

.ICNA
F

:"c
"A
.M

10' 10'

AGE, IN YEARS

10'

10'

slope
/ Na(.393)
tCa(.393) O cc
CC. u_

I- V
zz

N A C
- »F

0N £E ^ iii OC Q- O
X
-1
107 10'

10" 10 10' 10 C AGE, IN YEARS

.A :.NA
C F

ID-

104 10 5

10e

AGE, INYEARS

10'
slope g(.473) a (.392) Na(.347>-
10 7

Figure 9. Percentage of element loss from A (A_-_C) and B (D_-F) horizons for three size fractions versus
best-estimate age. Using Merrill's (1906) loss equation (eq. 1), calculations used Zr for a stable index and sample M1Z-C1 for parent material. Linear regression was computed for all analyses, but values for each age

group (table 2) are averaged to show sample point. Dashed lines indicate regressions with less than 95percent confidence (trial 1, table 3). Holocene soils are plotted but not used in regression because of differences in parent material. Positive slope, net loss; negative slope, net gain.

development rates, in which a given soil property is plotted or regressed against age. In addition, analysis of multiple soil profiles on a given-age surface provides a measure of soil variation. There are important limitations to these techniques, however, many of which have been identified or rectified in previous sections of this report. Probably the greatest limitation to estimating soil-development rates from

soil chronosequences is age uncertainties. As discussed in the preceding section, the effect of age uncertainties can be assessed by using different combinations of ages to calculate soil-development rates. Because some soil properties may change over wide or only narrow age ranges (for example, organic-carbon accumulation during the Holocene, or clay-film development during the Pliocene and Pleistocene),

A18 Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

Table 4. Order of rates of element loss from size separates
[Percent-loss method from Merrill's (1906) loss equation, using Zr as index and sample M12-C1 as parent material (see fig. 9 for regressions). Other elements were omitted because correlations with age were poor. Accumulation-series method as in figure 8]

Fraction

A horizon

B horizon

Percent-loss method

Silt plus clay

Zr<Fe<Al<Mg<Na<Ca

Whole soil

Zr<Fe<Al<Mg<Na,Ca

Al<Fe<Zr<Na<Ca<Mg Zr<Fe<Al<Ca<Na<Mg

Accumulation-series method

Silt plus claySand

Ti,Fe<Al<K<Mg,Na<Ca Ti ,Zr<Si,Fe<Al<K<Ca

Whole soil

Ti<Fe<Si<Al ,K<Na,Ca

Ti,Fe,Al<Si<Zr<K<Na<Ca
Ti<Fe,Si<Al,K<Na<Ca and ZrxSi
Ti ,Fe<Al<Si<K<Na,Ca and Zr<K

regressions of soil properties versus age are studied separately for the age spans 0-10, 0-3,000, 20-600, and 20-3,000 ka.
For soil properties that develop throughout the 3,000-ka age span of these surfaces, plots of soil property versus age are convex downward (fig. 10_A),
and of soil property versus the logarithm of age are bowl shaped (fig. 6B); the straightest curves are in loglog plots of soil property versus age (fig. 10A). Thus, linear regression must be applied only to log-log transformations for the wide (3,000 ka) age span. Seven
trials of different age combinations suggest that rates
using best-estimate ages are accurate within a factor
of about 2 (fig. lOAj table 5). Minimum rates, obtained in trial 5 or 6, are obtained when minimum ages are used for young units and maximum ages for old units. Maximum rates (trial 2 or 3) correspond to a combination of maximum young and minimum old
ages. Intermediate-age units in either of these cases may be assigned either best-guess or constraining ages.
Soil properties that develop primarily during the Holocene or Pleistocene age spans raise some important questions as to whether rates are linear or exponential. Properties that develop only during the Holocene or Pleistocene generally fit into linear curves, even when age uncertainies are accounted for. The seven combinations of ages have significant correlation coefficients for linear regressions of soil property versus age (figs. 1013, 10(3; table 6). As in the trials for elemental analysis and the wide-range
regressions (table 5), age uncertainties permit the rates to vary by a factor of about 2. If soil properties from the wide-range examples are plotted for only the Holocene or Pleistocene, the same properties appear to have linear rates, even though these rates are generally exponential over wider age spans. The exponential functions, then, might be approximated by linear segments along the curve (fig. 11). As would be

2.5 . A
2.0
1.5 I- oL cc O

O 0.5 CO

10 5 AGE, IN YEARS

107

O£ cc 5
2.4
CD LU
h m< <->
1.8
I CC 1 2
LU LU
. II 0.6

2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 AGE, IN YEARS

O N CC
* OT 10°

O< LL. LL. OO

80

3P 60

Z QC
O"
cc u*
LU Z

40

^^20

O DC "- 0

150 300 450 600 750 900 AGE, IN THOUSANDS OF YEARS

Figure 10. Rates of soil-property development for three timespans. A^ Soil-development index. 15, Dithionate-extractable Fe. Cj Percent loss of Ca from A-horizon silt-plus-clay fraction. Points and numbers indicate samples at best-estimate age (table 1); error bars represent age uncertainty. Regression lines for
constraining rates are from tables 5 through 7.

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A19

Table 5. Tests for constraining rates of soil development for Late Cenozoic deposits, when age uncertainties are considered
[Field properties from Harden (1982a). Rates vary by a factor of about 1.7. _S, standard deviation of predicted y_ values]

Age used for trial (ka)

Map unit

prolll pmll m2 ml r3 r2 t2 CH
Property

Regression

0.20 3.00 10.00 40.00 130.00 250.00 600.00 3,000.00

1.00 8.30 14.00 40.00 130.00 103.00 570.00 1,000.00

1.00 8.30 14.00 20.00 103.00 103.00 570.00 1,000.00

1.00 1.00 14.00 20.00 103.00 330.00 615.00 4,000.00

0.05 1.00 8.30 40.00 130.00 330.00 615.00 4,000.00

0.05 1.00 8.30 70.00 250.00 330.00 615.00 4,000.00

0.20 3.00 10.00 40.00 130.00 330.00 615.00 4,000.00

Range in rate (trial)

Soil development index (SDI). (_n=20)
Rubification (rub). (_n_=18)
<2-ym cl ay (_n=20)

Slope y-intercept rz 7
Slope ^-intercept r2 T
Slope y-intercept r2 T

log SDI/log yr log SDI x cm/100 .01 percen log SDI x m/100
log rub/lo yr log rub x m/100 .01 percen log rub x m/100
log g/cm^/log yr log g/cmz .01 percent log g/an ?

0.495 -.731
.931 .173
.107 -.271
.884 .06
.454 -.556
.937 .16

0.680 -1.64
.930 .19
.146 -.465
.879 .056
.620 -1.37
.916 .19

0.674 -1.59
.908 .21
.146 -.459
.868 .06
.617 -1.34
.902 .20

0.555 -1.12
.869 .25
.120 -.358
.826 .068
.513 -.938
.884 .22

0.415 -.296
.950 .16
.089 -.177
.890 .054
.381 -.158
.950 .14

0.412 -.299
.958 .14
.089 -.176
.839 .05
.377 -.157
.954 .14

0.479 -.675
.932 .18
.104 -.259
.876 .057
.440 -.507
.933 .17

0.412 (5) to 0.680 (2) 0.089 (5, 6) to 0.146 (2, 3) 0.377 (6) to 0.620 (2)

expected from exponentially decreasing functions, Holocene rates are 10 times higher than Pleistocene rates of the same soil properties (table 7). Although the exact form of the curves may not prove to be correct when more data are available, the data clearly show that initial rates are highest at first and drop off drastically within 100 ka.
The age combinations in tables 5 through 7 generally constrain the rates of soil (or soil property) development. They demonstrate that best-estimate ages are intermediate between minimum and maximum possible rates, and that rates based on best-estimate ages are accurate to within a factor of about 2. Although the linear rates documented for the Holocene and Pleistocene may not be representative for longterm processes, the straight, nonlogarithmic units are easy to interpret and compare with those from other studies, and they are probably reasonable approximations of short-term rates.
DISCUSSION
The systematic changes in the properties of Merced soils with age suggest that over intervals of thousands of years, some processes may act nearly continuously on soils, regardless of shorter term fluctuations and perturbations in soil-forming factors, such as paleoclimate or erosion. One question that should be addressed, however, is whether pre-Holocene soils formed as a result of modern soil-forming processes, or whether they are relict from past and different processes. If past processes were similar to modern ones, then "empirical" rates of soil-property development with age may be reasonable estimates of

the actual rates. If past effects of paleoclimate and vegetation on soil development can be accounted for, then soil-chronosequence studies can provide an onsite, empirical laboratory for such fundamental questions as how soil properties and rates of soil development differ with climate and time, how mineral-dissolution
rates compare with those determined by laboratory and theoretical studies, and how soils might respond to such perturbations as cultivation, erosion, deposition,
or changes in climate. The changes in major-element (total) chemistry
over time are generally systematic for most of the size fractions and soil horizons. The changes over
time in the A horizons suggest that the geomorphic surfaces are somewhat stable and do not receive significant amounts of eolian materials, or that such processes are time dependent. It may be that the surfaces are being eroded, but erosion rates would have to be slow for chemical trends of the A horizons to change systematically with age. For example, if all the surfaces had vast erosion rates, then soils probably would not form. If individual soils were more eroded
than others, then age trends would not be expected, especially in the A horizons. If these soils are being eroded slowly but continually, then the actual rates of soil development would be far greater than those documented by the chronosequence. Decreasing rates of various soil properties over time (table 8) could
reflect geomorphic stability rather than the kinetics of mineral dissolution or other soil processes. Recent
10 Be analyses of the soils sampled in this study (M.J. Pavich, written commun., 1984) suggest significant erosion of these surfaces. One argument for a kinetic origin of the decreasing rates of soil development is

A20 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Table 6. Tests for constraining rates of soil development for Holocene deposits, when age uncertainties are considered
[Field properties from Harden (1982a). Trial 7 is generally not significant at the 5-percent-confidence level Rates commonly vary by a factor of about 2.5. _S_, standard deviation of predicted y_ values]

Trial Map unit

-

pmlll
pmll m2

Property

Regression

Organic-carbon content.
Mel anization (mel). (_n=10)
Dithioniteextractabl e Fe. (£=9)
Dry consistence (dc) . (n=8)
Rubif ication (rub) . (n.= 10)
<2-ytn clay (n_=10)

Slope y-intercept r2
^
Slope _y_-intercept r2 j>
Slope y-intercept r2 _S
Slope y-intercept T2
T
Slope y-intercept r2 J>
Slope y-intercept
~rs 2

Soil development index (SDI). (_n = 10)

Slope y-intercept r^
^

Age used for trials (ka) 1 234567

0.20
3.00 10.00

0.05
3.00 14.00

0.05 8.30 14.00

0.05
1.00 14.00

1.00 3.00 8.30

1.00 8.30 8.30

0.20
8.30 8.30

Units

Range in rate (trial )

g/cm 2 /ka g/cm 2 .01 percent mel x cm/ka
mel x cm/ka mel x cm .01 percent mel x cm
g/cm 2/ka g/cm 2 .01 cercent
g/cm2
dc x cm/ka dc x cm .01 Dercent y/cm 2
rub x cm/ka rub x cm .01 percent g/cm 2
g/cm 2 /ka y/cm 2 .01 oercent g/cm2
SDI x cm/ka SDI x cm .01 percent SDI x cm

0.036 .636 .256 .22
3.83 22.0
.69 9.4
.192 .744 .60 .61
3.27 4.31
.18 3.78
2.78 11.1
.644 7.5
2.30 2.40
.730 5.11
1.69 .22 .845
2.6

0.023 .669 .225 .228
2.54 25.0
.662 9.80
.127 .889 .576 .63
2.14 7.15
.900 4.18
1.81 13.5
.596 8.03
1.56 4.13
.733 5.08
1.12 4.53
.816 2.87

0.030 .537 .341 .21
2.68 15.8
.627 10.3
.136 .445 .568 .63
2.53 -3.32
.805 5.8
2.12 5.25
.700 6.9
1.46 -.047
.46 6.6
1.18 .540 .764
3.3

0.018 .713 .168 .24
2.19 29.2
.592 10.8
.110 1.09
.512 .672
1.85 11.1
.855 5.2
1.50 16.7
.494 9.0
1.39 6.57
.705 5.3
.966 6.4
.732 3.5

0.048 .060 .251 .22
5.10 18.0
.684 9.5
.255 .545 .597 .610
4.34 .987 .916
3.8
3.69 8.29
.637 7.6
3.08 .056 .732
5.1
2.25 1.47
.841 2.7

0.042 .488 .277 .22
2.87 17.1
.308 14.0
.155 .465 .306 .80
2.46 .544 .268 .11
2.58 4.11
.446 9.4
1.29 2.52
.182 8.9
1.25 1.17
.369 5.32

0.038 .522 .277 .22
2.58 19.4
.308 14.0
.139 .592 .306 .80
2.21 2.56
.268 11.3
2.33 6.23
.446 9.4
1.16 3.57
.182 8.9
1.12 2.20
.369 5.3

0.18 (4) to 0.48 (5) 2.19 (4) to 5.10 (5) 0.110 (4) to 0.255 (5) 1.85 (4) to 4.34 (5) 1.50 (4) to 3.69 (5) 1.16 (7) to 3.08 (5) 0.966 (7) to 2.25 (5)

that studies on mineral weathering (Colman, 1982) typically document initially rapid rates, followed by slower rates.
The appropriateness of linear or nonlinear curve fitting is a difficult problem to overcome with these data. This study has shown that long-term exponential curves can be approximated by shorter term, linear segments (fig. 11); other chronosequence studies with narrow age spans may be approximated by linear rates for the same reason. In other words, such studies may actually demonstrate long-term nonlinear rates if older and (or) younger units were available for sampling.
Estimation of the ages of other deposits by using soil chronosequences is an important implication of this study, because so many soil properties change systematically with age. The age uncertainties of the chronosequence, however, are intrinsic to prediction of other ages. The clay content of Merced soils provides a good example for some methods and illustrates the problems with age prediction. When the clay content
(y_-axis) is regressed against best-estimate age (x_-axis)

about the regression line, then the standard error of estimate S, given by
(where ^Q..^ is the predicted value of y_, and n_ is the number of samples), is about 30 percent (see table 5). In other words, there is about 30-percent scatter about the regression line related to soil variation. This result is commensurate with estimates of the amount of soil variation on a single-age surface, as represented by the standard deviation divided by the mean for replicate soils on a given terrace (Harden, 1982b). When the axes are switched, however, so that age is the dependent variable (y_-axis), then S^ more than doubles to about 70 percent (fig. 12). (Because the best-estimate ages are fixed without any uncertainties, this standard error cannot be related to inaccurate dating of the terraces.) The standard error, which is a rough estimate of how precise age estimates

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A21

300 -0

500 1000 1500 2000 2500 AGE, IN THOUSANDS OF YEARS

3000

by soils could be, suggests that a 100-ka-old deposit
would be reported as being from about 40 to 160 ka old. More appropriate statistics are needed to consider the source of these errors. The standard
error should increase when age errors are
incorporated, but it might decrease when more appropriate statistics are used. Intuitively, because soil variation is typically about 30 percent, more appropriate statistics and sampling might improve the estimates to no better than about 30 percent for this
clay function over the 3,000-ka age span. Another aspect that should be considered for age
prediction is the time dependence of different soil parameters. Although it is probably advantageous to
use several soil properties for age estimates, a scheme must be devised for using properties that are limited
to the Holocene or Pleistocene. One possibility is to use wide-range (0-3,000 ka) properties (table 5) for first-order estimates, and then to use Holocene and
pre-Holocene parameters (tables 6, 7) for the appropriate soils. The more restricted age ranges, with their linear rates, might actually improve the
precision of age estimates because then the standard
errors are lower than in exponential functions.

160 -

2 4 6 8 10 12 AGE, IN THOUSANDS OF YEARS

14

- 35 -

150 300 450 600 750 AGE, IN THOUSANDS OF YEARS

900

Figure 11. Exponential curve of clay content versus age, approximated by linear segments. Aj Clay content versus log age for the timespan 3,000-0 ka. _B> clay versus age for the timespan 10-0 ka. Cj Clay versus age for the timespan 600-20 ka. Points and numbers indicate samples at best-estimate ages (table 2); error bars indicate constraining ages. Regression lines for rates are from tables 5 through 7.

SUMMARY

The soil chronosequence near the Merced River

demonstrates that many soil properties develop

systematically over time and that a significant associ-

ation exists between soil properties and geologic age.

Morphologic properties that develop most regularly

with age over wide (3,000 ka) or narrower (10 ka to a

few tens of thousands of years) age ranges include clay

films, total texture (texture and wet consistence),

rubification (color hue and chroma), dry consistence,

and the soil-development index (Harden, 1982a), which

combines the morphologic properties. Elements

determined by total-chemical analysis that change

most systematically with age include Ca, Mg, Na, Fe,

Al, and Ti, as expressed in loss percent relative to Zr,

which is assumed to be stable. Physical properties

most indicative of age include clay percent, bulk

density, and thickness or depth to C horizons; extrac-

tive-chemical analyses include dithionite- and oxalate-

extractable Fe. Although many mineralogic properties

(percentages and degree of etching) do not change

systematically with age or cannot be measured

precisely enough, these analyses help to interpret the

significance of other trends.

Several of the methods for data analysis

described in this report can be applied to similar

studies.

From total-chemical analysis, an

accumulation series was developed to determine

relative rates of element loss. This series can be used

for soil chronosequences that lack radiometric age

control but whose relative ages are well defined.

Merrill's (1906) loss calculation was adopted for calcu-

lating the percent loss of an element from a given size

fraction. Zr appears to work well as a stable index

element. The selection of a single sample for the

parent material of all soils appears to be appropriate

for pre-Holocene deposits.

A22 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Table 7. Tests for constraining rates of soil development for Pleistocene deposits, when age uncertainties are considered
[Field properties from Harden (1982a). Rates vary by a factor of about 1.3. _S, standard deviation of predicted y_ values]

Trial- --Map unit

Age used for trial (Ica) 1 234 56 7

ml

40.0

20. 0

20.0

20.0

70.0

70.0

70.0

r3

130.0

130.0

250.0

103.0

130.0

103.0

250.0

r2

250.0

330.0

330.0

330.0

103.0

103.0

250. 0

t2

600.0

615.0

615.0

615.0

570.0

570.0

600.0

Property

Regression

Units

Range in rate (trial )

Total texture (r 7 >
Clay films (Jl=7)
Rubification (rub). (£=5)
Soil development index (SDI). (_n=7)
<2-um clay (ji=8)
Di thioniteextractable Fe. (£=8)

Slope y-intercept r2 7
Slope y-interrp"t T2 T
Slope y-intercept r2 T
Slope y-intercept r2 T
Slope "yr -2intercept
T
Slope y-intercept r2 T

total texture x cm/ka total texture x cm .01 percent total texture x cm
clay films x cm/ka clay films .01 percent clay films
rub x cm/ka rub x cm .01 percent rub x cm
SDI x cm/ka SDI x cm .01 percent SDI
g/cm 2 /ka g/cm' .01 percent g/cm 2
g/cm 2/ka g/cm 2 0.1 percent g/cm 2

0.153 bl.b
.806 18.7
0.218 79.4
.830 24.6
.339 49.4
.942 25.6
.212 59.2
.762 29.4
.112 57.8
.183 15.1
.0061 1.40
.352 2.1

0.144 50.5
.774 20.2
0.213 75.5
.863 ?2.0
.329 46.8
.955 22.4
.198 58.4
.721 31.9
.108 65.5
.774 15.4
.0060 1.31
.353 2.13

0.166 38.1
.822 17.9
0.246 56.9
.923 16.5
.347 32.1
.926 28.9
.225 42.1
.154 29.9
.130 44.8
.901 10.2
.0067 .866 .353 2.13

0.138 53.4
.754 21.1
.204 79.9
.841 23.8
.322 50.9
.953 23.0
.190 62.4
.705 32.8
.103 59.0
.743 16.4
.0058 1.42
.349 2.13

0.148 59.8
.748 21.4
.194 95.2
.655 34. q
.323 65.9
.825 44.4
.207 70.1
.728 31.4
.105 64.5
.712 17.4
.0057 1.79
.311 2.19

0.145 61.7
.744 21.5
.190 97.7
.654 35.0
.319 68.8
.832 43.5
.203 72.7
.726 31.6
.102 66.2
.694 17.9
.0056 1.85
.314 2.19

0.177 37.7
.830 17.5
.249 60.8
.837 24.0
.369 ?8.8
.900 33.6
.244 40.7
.779 28.3
.134 46.1
.870 11.4
.0069 .924 .343 2.14

0.138 (4) to 0.177 (7) 0.190 (6) to 0.249 (7) 0.319 (6) to 0.369 (7) 0.190 (4) to 0.244 (7) 0.102 (6) to 0.134 (7) 0.0056 (6) to 0.0069 (7)

Table 8. Comparison of Holocene and Pleistocene rates of soil development from tables 6 and 7
[Field properties from Harden (1982a)]

Property
Dithionite-extractable Fe.
Rubification (rub)<l-wm clay---------
Soil-development index (SDI).

Holocene rate

g/cmVka

0.110-0.255

rub x cm/ka g/cm 2 /ka SDI x cm/ka

1.5-3.69 1.16-3.08 .966-2.25

Pleistocene rate
0.0056-0.0069
.319-0.369 .102-0.134 .190-0.244

7.0
c<11c1
5.0 4.0

0 3.0 O

Long-term rates of soil development or some aspect of soil development, such as element loss or
morphologic changes, can be estimated from these data. The variation between soils on the same age
surface was represented by replication of soils on each terrace. Uncertainties in the ages of deposits can be
considered by using minimum and maximum age constraints.

2.0 0

0.6 1.2

1.8 2.4 3.0

LOGARITHM OF CLAY CONTENT (IN GRAMS PER SQUARE CENTIMETER)

Figure 12. Example of estimating age from soil development. Points and numbers indicate number of samples. Heavy line, regression line; light lines, standard deviation of predicted %_ values about regression line.

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A23

REFERENCES CITED
Adam, D.P., 1967, Late-Pleistocene and Recent palynology in the central Sierra Nevada, California, in Gushing, E.J., and Wright, H.E., Jr., eds., Quaternary paleoecology: New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press, p. 275-301.
Arkley, R.J., 1954, Soils of eastern Merced County: University of California, Exploration Station Soil Survey, v. 11, 174 p. 1962a, The geology, geomorphology, and soils of the San Joaquin Valley in the vicinity of the Merced River, California, in Geologic guide to the Merced Canyon and Yosemite Valley, California: California Division of Mines and Geology Bulletin 182, p. 25-31. 1962b, Soil survey of the Merced area, California: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Survey Serial 1950, no. 7, 131 p. 1963, Calculation of carbonate and water movement in soil from climatic data: Soil Science, 96, no. 4, p. 239-248.
Arkley, R.J., and Brown, H.C., 1954, The origin of Mima mound (hogwallow) microrelief in the far western states: Soil Science Society of America Proceedings, v. 18, no. 2, p. 195-199.
Atwater, B.F., Adam, D.P., Bradburg, J.P., Forester, R.M., Mark, R.K., Lettis, W.R., Fisher, G.R., Gobalet, K.W., and Robinson, S.W., in press, A fan dam for Tulare Lake, California, and implications for the Wisconsin glacial history of the Sierra Nevada: Geological Society of America Bulletin. 1964, Chemistry of soil development, chap. 2 of Bear, F.E., ed., Chemistry of the soil: New York, Reinhold, p. 1-70.
Birkeland, P.W., 1964, Pleistocene glaciation of the northern Sierra Nevada north of Lake Tahoe, California: Journal of Geology, v. 72, no. 6, p. 810-825. 1974, Pedology, weathering, and geomorphologic research: New York, Oxford University Press, 285 p.
Birman, J.H., 1954, Pleistocene glaciation in the upper San Joaquin basin, Sierra Nevada, pt. 6 of Geomorphology, chap. 5 of Jahns, R.H., ed., Geology of southern California: California Division of Mines Bulletin 170, p. 41-44. 1957, Glacial geology of the upper San Joaquin drainage, Sierra Nevada, California: Los Angeles, University of California, Ph.D. thesis, 237 p. 1964, Glacial geology across the crest of the Sierra Nevada: Geological Society of America Special Paper 75, 80 p.
Blackwelder, Elliot, 1931, Pleistocene glaciation in the Sierra Nevada and Basin Ranges: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 42, no. 4, 865922. 1932, Glacial and associated stream deposits of the Sierra Nevada: California State Mineralogist Annual Report 28, no. 3-4, p. 303-310.
Burke, R.M., and Birkeland, P.W., 1979, Reevaluation of multiparameter relative dating techniques and their application to the glacial sequence along

the eastern escarpment of the Sierra Nevada, California: Quaternary Research, v. 11, no. 1, p. 21-51. Busacca, A.J., 1982, Geologic history and soil development, northeastern Sacramento Valley, California: Davis, University of California, Ph.D. thesis, 348 p. Busacca, A.J., Aniku, J.R., and Singer, M.J., 1984, Dispersion of soils by an ultrasonic method that eliminates probe contact: Soil Science Society of America Journal, v. 48, no. 5, p. 1125-1129. Colman, S.M., 1982, Chemical weathering of basalts and andesites evidence from weathering rinds: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1246, 51 p. Croft, M.G., 1968, Geology and radiocarbon ages of late Pleistocene lacustrine clay deposits, southern part of San Joaquin Valley, California, in Geological Survey research, 1968: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 600-B, p. B151-B156. 1972, Subsurface geology of the late Tertiary and Quaternary water-bearing deposits of the southern part of the San Joaquin Valley, California: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 1999-H, p. H1-H29. Curry, R.R., 1969, Holocene climatic and glacial history of the central Sierra Nevada, California, in Schummm, S.A., and Bradley, W.C., eds., United States contributions to Quaternary research: Geologic Society of America Special Paper 123, p. 1-47. Dalrymple, G.B., 1980, K-Ar ages of the Friant Pumice Member of the Turlock Lake Formation, the Bishop Tuff, and the tuff of Reds Meadow, central California: Isochron/West, no. 28, p. 3-4. Davis, S.N., and Hall, F.R., 1959, Water quality of eastern Stanislaus and northern Merced Counties, California: Stanford University Publications in the Geological Sciences, v. 6, no. 1, 112 p.
Deming, W.E., 1943, Statistical treatment of data: New York, John Wiley, 261 p.
Dethier, D.P., and Bethel, John, 1981, Surficial deposits along the Cowlitz River near Toledo, Lewis Country, Washington: U.S. Geological
Survey Open-File Report 81-1043, 67 p. Frye, J.C., 1973, Pleistocene succession of the central
interior United States: Quaternary Research, v. 3, no. 2, p. 275-283. Gillam, M.L., Ensey, Chuck, Page, W.D., and Blum, R.L., 1977, Heavy mineral etching in soils from the Merced and Truckee areas, California, in Singer, M.J., ed., Soil development, geomorphology, and Cenozoic history of the northeastern San Joaquin Valley and adjacent areas, California: Soil Sciences Society of America-Geological Society of America joint field session, 1977, guidebook, p. 22-38 Goldich, S.S., 1938, A study in rock weathering: Journal of Geology, v. 46, no. 1, p. 47-58. Hansen, R.O., and Begg, E.L., 1970, Age of Quaternary sediments and soils in the Sacramento area, California, by uranium and actinium series dating of vertebrate fossils: Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 8, no. 6, p. 411-419.

A24 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Harden, J.W., 1982a, A quantitative index of soil

development from field descriptions: Examples

from a chronosequence in central California:

Geoderma, v. 28, no. 1, p. 1-28.

1982b, A study of soil development using the

geochronology of Merced River deposits:

Berkeley, University of California, Ph.D. thesis,

237 p.

Harden, J.W., and Marchand, D.E., 1977, The soil

chronosequence of the Merced River area, in

Singer, M.J., ed., Soil development,

geomorphology, and Cenozoic history of the

northeastern San Joaquin Valley and adjacent

areas, California: Soil Science Society of

America-Geological Society of America joint

field session, 1977, guidebook, p. 22-38.

1980, Quaternary stratigraphy and interpretation

of soil data from the Auburn, Oroville, and

Sonora areas along the Foothills fault system,

western Sierra Nevada, California: U.S.

Geological Survey Open-File Report 80-30, 57 p.

Harden, J.W., and Taylor, E.T., 1983, A quantitative

comparison of soil development in four climatic

regimes: Quaternary Research, v. 20, no. 3, p.

342-359.

Helley, E.J., 1966, Sediment transport in the

Chowchilla River basin: Mariposa, Madera, and

Merced Counties, California:

Berkeley,

University of California, Ph.D. thesis, 189 p.

Huber, N.K., 1981, Amount and timing of late

Cenozoic uplift and tilt of the central Sierra

Nevada, California evidence from the upper San

Joaquin River basin: U.S. Geological Survey

Professional Paper 1197, 28 p.

Huntington, G.L., 1971, Soil survey of the eastern

Fresno area, California: Washington, U.S.

Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation

Service, 323 p.

Janda, R.J., 1965, Quaternary alluvium near Friant,

California, in International Association for

Quaternary Research Guidebook for Field

Conference I, northern Great Basin and

California: Lincoln, Nebraska Academy of

Sciences, p. 128-133.

1966, Pleistocene history and hydrology of the

upper San Joaquin River, California: Berkeley,

University of California, Ph.D. thesis, 425 p.

Janda, R.J., and Croft, M.G., 1967, The stratigraphic

significance of a sequence of noncalcic brown

soils formed on the Quaternary alluvium of the

northeastern San Joaquin Valley, California, in

Morrison, R.B., and Wright, H.E., Jr., eds.,

Quaternary soils: International Association for

Quaternary Research Congress, 7th, Reno, Nev.,

1967, Proceedings, v. 9, p. 158-190.

Jenny, Hans, 1941, Factors of soil formation: New

York, McGraw-Hill, 281 p.

Mabee, 1978, The use of magnetite alteration as a

relative age dating technique: Preliminary

results: Boulder, University of Colorado, M.S.

thesis, 183 p.

Marchand, D.E., 1976a, Late Cenozoic stratigraphy

and history of the northeastern San Joaquin

Valley: Some early results of a regional study

abs. : Geological Society of America Abstracts

with Programs, v. 8, no, 3, p. 393-394.

1976b, Preliminary geologic maps showing

Quaternary deposits of the northern Merced

area, eastern San Joaquin Valley, Merced and

Stanislaus Counties, California: U.S. Geological

Survey Open-File Report 76-836, 12 p., scale

1:24,000, 8 sheets.

1976c, Preliminary geologic maps showing

Quaternary deposits of the Merced area, eastern

San Joaquin Valley, Merced County, California:

U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 76-837,

12 p., scale 1:24,000, 7 sheets.

1976d, Preliminary geologic maps showing

Quaternary deposits of the southern Merced

area, eastern San Joaquin Valley, Merced and

Madera Counties, California: U.S. Geological

Survey Open-File Report 76-838, 12 p., 1:24,000,

7 sheets.

1976e, Preliminary geologic maps showing

Quaternary deposits of the Chowchilla area,

eastern San Joaquin Valley, Merced and Madera

Counties, California: U.S. Geological Survey

Open-File Report 76-839, 12 p., scale 1:24,000, 5

sheets.

1976f, Preliminary geologic maps showing

Quaternary deposits of the Daulton area, eastern

San Joaquin Valley, Madera County, California:

U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 76-840,

12 p., scale 1:24,000, 4 sheets.

1976g, Preliminary geologic maps showing

Quaternary deposits of the Madera area, eastern

San Joaquin Valley, Madera and Fresno Counties,

California: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File

Report 76-841, 12 p., scale 1:24,000, 8 sheets.

1977, The Cenozoic history of the San Joaquin

Valley and the adjacent Sierra Nevada as

inferred from the geology and soils of the

eastern San Joaquin Valley, in Singer, M.H., ed.,

Soil development, geomorphology, and Cenozoic

of the northeastern San Joaquin Valley and

adjacent areas, California: Soil Science of

America-Geological Society of America joint

field session, 1977, guidebook, p. 39-50.

Marchand, D.E., and Allwardt, Alan, 1981, Late

Cenozoic stratigraphic units in northeastern San

Joaquin Valley, California: U.S. Geological

Survey Bulletin 170, 70 p.

Marchand, D.E., and Harden, J.W., 1978, Preliminary

geologic maps showing Quaternary deposits on

the lower Tuolumne and Stanislaus alluvial fans

and along the lower San Joaquin River, Stanislaus

County, California: U.S. Geological Survey

Open-File Report 78-656, 9 p., 4 sheets.

Machette, M.N., 1983, Geologic map of the southwest

quarter of the Beaver quadrangle, Beaver

County, Utah:

U.S. Geological Survey

Miscellaneous Investigations Series Map 1-1444,

scale 1:24,000.

Machette, M.N., and Steven, T.A., 1983, Geologic map

of the northwest quarter of the Beaver

quadrangle, Beaver County: U.S. Geological

Survey Miscellaneous Investigations Series Map I-

1445, scale 1:24,000.

Machette, M.N., Steven, T.A., Cunningham, C.G., and

Anderson, J.J., 1984, Geologic map of the Beaver

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A25

quadrangle, Beaver and Piute Counties, Utah:

U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous

Investigations Series Map 1-1520, scale 1:50,000.

Matthes, F.E., I960, Reconnaissance of the

geomorphology and glacial geology of the San

Joaquin Basin, Sierra Nevada, California: U.S.

Geological Survey Professional Paper 329, 62 p.

Merrill, G.P., 1906, A treatise on rocks, rock

weathering and soils: New York, Macmillan, 400 P-

Meixner, R.E., and Singer, M.J., 1981, Use of a field

morphology rating system to evaluate soil

formation and discontinuities: Soil Science, v.

131, no. 2, p. 114-123.

Morrison, R.B., 1967, Principles in Quaternary soils, in

Morrison, R.B., and Wright, H.E., Jr. eds.,

Quaternary soils: International Association for

Quaternary Research Congress, 7th, Reno, Nev.,

1967, Proceedings, v. 9, p.

Nikiforoff, C.C., 1941, Hardpan and microrelief in

certain soil complexes of California: U.S.

Department of Agriculture Technical Bulletin

745, p. 45.

Packer, R., McCleary, J.R., Chervan, V.O., and Blum,

R.L., 1977, Paleomagnetic investigations of the

Turlock Lake Formation at the type section, in

Singer, M.J., ed., Soil development,

geomorphology, and Cenozoic history of the

northeastern San Joaquin Valley and adjacent

areas, California: Soil Science Society of

America-Geological Society of America joint

field session, 1977, guidebook, p. 22-38.

Page, W.D., Swan, F.H., m, Hanson, K.L., Muller,

David, and Blum, Raymond, 1977, Prairie Mound

(Mima Mound, Hog Wallows) in the Central

Valley, in Singer, M.J., ed., Soil development,

geomorphology, and Cenozoic history of the northeastern San Joaquin Valley and adjacent

areas, California: Soil Science Society of

America-Geological Society of America joint

field session, 1977, guidebook, p. 267-276.

Reheis, M.C., 1984, Chronologic and climatic control

on soil development, northeastern Bighorn Basin,

Wyoming and Montana: Boulder, University of Colorado, Ph.D. thesis, 293 p.

Rogers, T.H., compiler, 1966, San Jose sheet of

Geologic map of California: Sacramento,

California Division of Mines and Geology, scale

1:250,000.

Rosholt, J.N., 1978, Uranium-trend dating of alluvial

deposits, in Short papers of the Fourth

International Conference, Geochronology,

Cosmochronology, Isotope Geology:

U.S.

Geological Survey Open-File Report 78-701, p.

360-362.

1980, Uranium-trend dating of Quaternary

sediments: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File

Report 80-1087, 41 p.

Shackleton, N.J., and Opdyke, N D., 1976, Oxygen-

isotope and paleomagnetic stratigraphy of Pacific core V28-239, late Pliocene to latest

Pleistocene, in Cline, R.M., and Hays, J.D., eds., Investigation of late Quaternary paleoclimatology and paleoclimatology: Geological Society of America Memoir 145, p.
449-464. Shlemon, R.J., 1967, Quaternary geology of northern
Sacramento County: Geological Society of Sacramento annual field trip, 1967, guidebook, 60
P1975, Soil taxonomy a basic system of soil
classification for making and interpreting soil surveys: U.S. Department of Agriculture
Handbook 436, 754 p. Singer, M.J., and Janitsky, Peter, 1986, Field and
laboratory procedures used in a soil chronosequence study: U.S. Geological Survey
Bulletin 1648, 49 p. Soil Survey staff, 1962, Soil Survey manual: U.S.
Department of Agriculture Agriculture Handbook
18, 503 p. 1975, Soil taxonomy: A basic system of soil
classification for making and interpreting soil surveys: U.S. Department of Agriculture Agriculture Handbook 436, 754 p. Steidtmann, Edward, 1908, A graphic comparison of the alteration of rocks by weathering with their alteration by hot solutions: Economic Geology,
v. 3, no. 5, p. 381-409. Sudom, M.D., and St. Arnaud, R.J., 1971, Use of
quartz, zirconium and titanium as indices in pedological studies: Canadian Journal of Soil
Science, v. 51, no. 3, p. 385-396. Tate, M.W., and Clelland, R.C., 1957, Nonparametric
and shortcut statistics in the social, biological and medical sciences: Danvill, 111., Interstate, 171 p. Ulrich, R., and Stromberg, L.K., 1962, Soil survey of the Madera area, California: U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Survey Series 1951, no. 11, 155
PWahrhaftig, Clyde, and Birman, J.H., 1965, The
Quaternary of the Pacific mountain system in California, in Wright, H.E., Jr., and Frey, D.G., eds., 1965, The Quaternary of the United States: Princeton, N.J., Princeton University
Press, 299-340. Wild, A., 1961, Loss of zirconium form 12 soils derived
form granite: Australian Journal of Agricultural Resources, v. 12, p. 230-305. Williams, G.P., 1983, Improper use of regression equations in earth sciences: Geology, v. 11, no. 4, 195-197. Yaalon, D.H., 1975, Conceptual models in pedogenesis: Can soil-forming functions be solved? Geoderma, v. 14, no. 3, p. 189-205. Yount, J.C., Birkeland, P.W., and Burke, R.M., 1982, Holocene glaciation: Mono Creek, central Sierra Nevada, California [abs.]: Geological Society of America Abstracts with Programs, v. 14, no. 4, p. 246.

A26 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES

Supplementary Table 1. Field descriptions

Grade
m, massive sg, single grained 1. weak 2. moderate. 3. strong

EXPLANATION [see fig. 13 for sample locations)

SOIL STRUCTURE

Size

Type

vf, very fine (v thin) f, fine (thin)
m, medium,
c, coarse (thick)
vc, very coarse
(v thick)

gr, granular pi, platey pr, prismatic cpr, columnar abk, angular blocky sbk, subangular blocky

If two structures-listed as primary and secondary

SOIL TEXTURE

co, coarse f, fine vf, very fine

S, sand LS, loamy sand SL, sandy loam L, Loam SiL, silt loam Si, silt

SCL, sandy-clay loam CL, clay loam SiCL, silty-clay loam SC, sandy clay C, clay SiC, silty clay

Dry
lo, loose so, soft sh, slightly hard h, hard vh, very hard eh, extremely hard

SOIL CONSISTENCE

Moist

Wet

lo, loose vfr, very friable fr, friable fi, firm
vf, very firm efi, extremely firm

so, nonsticky ss, slightly sticky s, sticky
vs, very sticky

po, nonplastic ps, slightly plastic p, plastic
vp, very plastic

Distinctness
va, very abrupt a, abrupt c, clear g, gradual d, diffuse

HORIZON BOUNDARIES
Topography
s, smooth w, wavy i, irregular b, broken

Size
vf, very fine f, fine m, medium co, coarse

Abundance
1 few 2 common 3 many

ROOTS AND PORES
Pore Shape
tub, tubular ir, irregular v, vesicular

Frequency
vj, very few 1. few 2. common 3. many 4. continuous

CLAY FILMS

Thickness

Morphology

n, thin mk, moderately
thick k, thick

pf, ped face coatings br, bridging grains po, pore linings
(w, occurs as waves or lamellae) co, coats on clasts

A28 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

R30 Spelling f A PM1 8 R32 _^4^l MRA4

- 37°30'

120°45'
Figure 13. Study area in central California, showing locations of sampling sites.

120°15'

Supplementary Table 1. Field descriptions Continued

No. Sample

Horizon

Basal depth
(cm)

Lower Moist boun dary color

Consistence
Dry color Texture Structure Dry Moist Wet

Roots Pores

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 3 MRA3 4 MRA4

Modern River Alluv ium

5 PHI 5 6 7 8
9 10

A IIClox IIIC2ox IVC3ox
VC4n VICn

0-4 4-19 19-42 42-47
47-51 51-

a,w 10YR3/3 a,w 10YR4/4
rt 10YR4/3 a,i 10YR3/3.5
a,« 10YR4/2 10YR4/3.5

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

10YR5/3 10YR5/4 10YR5/3 10YR6/4,
10YR5/6 10YR6.5/2 10YR6/3

S LS S LS
coS S

1 m gr m sg sg
sg sg

o lo so.po h fr so.po o lo so.po o vfr so.po
o lo so.po o lo so.po

3vf
2vf,2f 2vf,lm 2m

Iftub

If

11 PM19 12
13 14
15 16 17 18

All IIA12
IIIClox IVC2ox
VC3ox VIC40X VIIC5ox VIIIC6

0-7 c,w 10YR2/2 7-12 g,w 10YR3/2

12-23 23-43

g,w 10YR3/3 a,w 10YR3/3

43-49 a,« 10YR3/3

49-55 a,w 10YR3/2

55-66 a,w 10YR3/2

66-80+

10YR3/2

10YR6/3 10YR6/3
10YR6/3 10YR5/3
10YR6/3 10YR6/3 10YR6.5/3 10YR6/3

SL fSL
LS L
LS vfSL S SiL

1 m gr m,l m sbk
m m, 1 m sbk
sg m sg

sh

vfr so.po fr so.po
vfr so.po fr ss.oo
lo so,po fr so,po lo so.po fr ss.po

3vf,3f 2f
2f Im.lf, Ics
If If
2vcs

Iflr 2f, Imtub Iftub 2f, Imtub
2ftub
2ftub

PM8 19
20 21 22

Ao Al
1IC1 IIIC2 IVC3

4-0 0-28
28-51 51-62 62-76

c,s g,w 10YR3/3
10YR3/3
g!s 10YR4/3

10YR5/4 10YR5/3 10YR6/3

Post-Modesto Deposits 3 Ka

2 gr

SiL 1 m sbk so

vfSL 1 co sbk sh

LS m

sh

fS sg

fr ss.po
fr so.po vfr so.po lo so.po

3f,3m 3f,3m
If

Iftub Imtub

23 PM13
24
25
26
27 28 29

All
A12
IIClox
IIIC2ox
IVC3ox VC4ox

0-5 5-35
35-86 86-112 112-136 136-160+

a,s c,w g,w

10YR3/2
10YR3/3
10YR4/3
10YR4/3
10YR4/3 10YR4/4,
3/6

10YR5/4 10YR4/3
10YR5/3
10YR5/4 10YR5/3 10YR5/4

SiL L
SL
LS LS SIL

2 f gr
m, m sbk, f gr m, m sbk
m, m sbk
sg

so so

vfr ss.po vfr ss,po
vfr so.po
vfr so.po lo so.po lo ss.po

2f
1m, Ico If

2m, 2fir 2f, Imtub 2vf tub Ivf tub

30 PM14 31 32
33
34 35 36

All IIA12 IIIClox
IVC2ox
YC3ox VIC4ox VIIC5n

0-3 3-33 33-99
99-130
130-175 175-200 2DO-230+

a,s c,w g,w
c,w
c,w c, w

10YR3/3 10YR3/3 10YR4/3
10YR4/3
10YR3/3 10YR3/3 10YR5/2

10YR5/3 10YR4/3 10YR5/3
10YR5/3
10YR5/4 10YR5/3 10YR7/2

L SiL SL
LS
SL LS S

2 m gr m, m sbk m, m sbk
m, 1 m sbk
n m sg

vfr 55, pO vfr ss.po vfr so.po
vfr so.po
vfr so.po vfr so.po lo so.po

3f 2m,2f 2vf
Ico, Ivc

3fir 2ftub
If tub Ivf
tub

37 PM16 38
39
40
41 42 43

A Clox
IIC2ox
IIIC3ox
IVC4ox YCSox VC6n

0-2 2-25
25-35
35-65
65-90 90-116+ 216-236

a,w g,«
g,w
g,w
g,w g,w

10YR3/4 10YR3/4
10YR3/3
10YR4/4
10YR4/3 10YR4/4 10YR3/4

10YR4/3 10YR5/4
10YR5/3
10YR5/4
10YR6/2 10YR5/4 10YR5/4

SL fSL
fSL
LS
S LS

1 m gr m, 2 m sbk
m, 2 m sbk
m, 1 m sbk
sg sg

sh sh
sh
so

fr so.po fr so.po
fr ss.po
vfr so.po
vfr so.po vfr so.po

3vf 2vf
2vf
If
If If

Imir 2vf tub 2vf
tub Ivf, Iftub

44 PM17 45 46 47
48

A IIClox IIC2ox
IIC3ox
IIIC4n

0-6 a,w 10YR3.5/4 10YR5/4 LS

6-45 g,w 10YR3/4

10YR5/3 fSL

1 co gr

sh

m, 1 m sbk sh

45-63 g,w 10YR3/4

10YR5/3 vfSL m, 1 m sbk sh

63-74 g,w 10YR4/4

10YR5/4 vfSL m, 1 m sbk sh

74-120+

10YR4/3

10YR5/3 LS

sg

fr so.po 3f fr so, po 2f fr so.po 2f
fr ss.po 2vf

Iftub Iftub 2ftub
2ftub

49 PM18 50 51 52 53

A IIClox IIC2ox
IIIC3ox
IVC4ox

0-6 6-65
65-115 115-164 164-175+

g,«
d,w
g,w

10YR3/2 10YR3/4 10YR4/4 10YR4/4 10YR4/4

10YR4/2 10YR5/4 10YR5/4 10YR5/4 10YR6/3

SL LS LS
S slgrS

2 11 gr m, 1 m sbk m, 1 m sbk sg sg

sh sh so

fr so.po fr so,po vfr so.po
lo so.po
lo so.po

3f 2m, 2f 3m,2co Im.lco

2fir
Iftub Imtub

Clay films

Assumed Parent Material
Met PH Texture consistence

0

5.84 S

so.po

0

5.69 LS

so.po

0

5.56 S

so.po

0

5.55 LS

so.po

0

5.72 coS

so.po

0

5.82 S

so.po

0

5.56 SL

so,po

0

6.25 fSL

so,po

0

6.32 LS

so.po

0

6.91 L

ss.po

0

6.79 LS

so.po

0 6.98 vfSL so.po

0

6.54 S

so.po

0 SiL ss.po

0

0

6.33 SiL

ss.po

0 7.20 vfSL so.po

0

7.33 LS

so.po

0

7.48 fS

so.po

0

6.30 SiL

ss.po

0

7.71 L

ss.po

0

7.85 LS

so,po

0

7.35 LS

so,po

0 LS so.po 0 SiL ss.po

0

6.42 L

ss.po

0

7.83 SIL

ss.po

0

7.83 SL

so,po

0

6.88 LS

so,po

0

6.54 SL

so.po

0

6.66 LS

so, po

0

6.92 S

so.po

0

6.50 SL

so,po

0

6.48 fSL

so.po

0

6.86 fSL

ss.po

0

7.29 LS

so.po

0

7.22 S

so.po

0

7.42 LS

so,po

0

0

6.61 LS

so.po

0

6.99 fSL

so.po

0 7.18 VfSL so,po

0 8.03 VfSL ss.po

0

7.83 LS

~"

0

7.26 LS

50, pO

0

6.00 LS

so,po

0

5.75 LS

so.po

0

5.98 S

so,po

0 6.20 SlgrS so.po

A30 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 1. Field descriptions Continued

No. Sample

Horizon

Basal depth (cm)

Lower Moist boundary color

54 M31 55 56
57 58

All A12 AC
IIC1 IIIC2

0-20 c,s 10YR3/2 20-63 g,w 10YR3/3 63-150 g,w 10YR3/3
150-200 c,w 10YR3/3 200-254 a,s

Consiste nee
Dry color Texture Structure Dry Moist Wet

10YR5/4 10YR6/4 10YR6/4
10YR5/4

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

SL 2 m gr fSL m fSL m
fSL m LS sg

so vfr ss.po so fr so.po sh so.po
h so.po To lo so.po

Roots Pores

2f 2m,lf

Iftub 2mtub 3m, 3ftub 2mtub

59 M46 60 61 62 63

Allp A12p IIA13p IIIAC IVCox II8b

0-5 c,w 10YR4/2

5-14 14-32

c,w 10YR4/2, 4/6
c,s 10YR3/3

32--66 g,« 10YR4/3

66-250 c,s 10YR4/3

250+

10YR6/3, 5/3
10YR5/3
10YR5/3
10YR5/3
10YR5/4

fSL fSL fSL fSL fSL

2 m+co gr
1 m pi
m, 2 m sbk
m, 2 co sbk sg

so sh sh h so

vfr so.po fr ss.po fi so.po fi so.po fr so.po

3m,2f, 2vf 2m, If 2m, 2f
1m, If If, Ivf

2fir
2f, 2vftub 3f, 2vftub 1m, 2ftub

Clay films

pH

Assumed parent Material
Met

0 0 0
0 0
0
0
0
2npo, Vinpo 0
0

7.62 SL 9.64 fSL 10.0 fSL
10.0 fSL 9.64 LS

ss.po so.po so.po
so.po so.po

6.29 fSL 6.76 fSL 6.77 fSL 7.01 fSL 7.04 fSL

so.po so,po so.po so,po so.po

64 M12 65 66 67
68 69 70
71 R9 72 73 74 75 76 77
78 R33 79 80 81 82
83 84
85 86 87
88 R2 89 90 91 92 93

All A12 IIB2H

0-15 c,« 10YR3/3 15-81 c,w 10YR3/2 81-102 g,w 10YR4/3

IIIB22t 102-170 c,« 10YR5/6

IVB3 170-201 g,w 10YR5/4 VC1 201-231 d,w 10YR4/4 VIC2 230-413+ -- 10YR6/2

10YR5/3 10YR6/3 10YR5/4
10YR5/6
10YR6/6
10YR6/4 10YR7/2

fSL LS LS
SL+
LS
S S

'

1 m sbk 1 m sbk 2 m sbk
2 m sbk

so h h
vh

2 m sbk
1 m sbk sg

h
so so

*
lo so.po fr so.po fr s,ps
fi s,ps
fr ss.ps lo ss.po lo so.po

Allp A12p
Bl IIB21 IIB22 IIB3 IVC

0-30 30-60
60-105 105-180
180-235
235-350 350-400+

g.s g,w
c,w c,w
g,w
c.s

10YR3/3 10-7. 5YR,
4/3 10YR4/3
7.5YR5/4
7.5YR6/4
7.5YR4/4
7.5YR5.5/6

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka

SL fr so.po SL 1 f sbk -- fr so.po

SL+ 1 m sbk

ss.ps

SCL 1 m sbk

s.P

SL sg

so.po

SL+ sg

ss.ps

LS sg

so.po

2m 2m

All IIA12
IIIA3
IIIB21t
III822t

0-4 4-19
19-39
39-62
62-83

c,s c,w
g,«
g,w
g,w

IIIB23t IIIB31

83-122 122-151

g,w g,w

IIIB32 IVB33 VCox

151-210 210-260 260-300+

c,w c.w --

SL 2 co gr sh fr so.po 2f

SL

2 co sbk sh

fr so.po 2f,

2m

SL 2 vco sbk h fr so.po If

-- coSCL- 2 co sbk vh fi ss.ps If

SCL 1 fi pr vh fi ss.ps

coSCL 1 fi pr coSCL- 2 vco sbk

vh vh

vfi s,P fi ss.ps

vgrSL vgrSL S

m.vco sbk sg sg

---

fi ss.ps vfr ss.ps
so.po

Ap 0-25 c,s 10YR3/3

B21 25-81 c,« 7.5YR4/4,

10YR3/3

B22t 81-185 c,« 7.5YR4/4

B3 185-386 g,w 10YR4/4

Cl 386-500 g,w 10YR5/4,

4/4

C2n 500+

10YR5/3

Riverbank Formation, middle member. 250 Ka

SL 2 f sbk SCL 3 co sbk
SCL+ 3 vco cpr SCL 2 co sbk SL m
S sg

ss.po ss.ps
S, P S
ss.po so.po
so.po

3mtub 3mtub
2m, Iftub

0 0 Inpo, Inbr 2mkpo, 2mkbr,
vjnpf Inpo, Inbr 0 0

fSL 6.45 LS 6.87 LS
6.67 LS
6.98 LS
7.34 S S

so.po so.po so.po
so,po
so.po
so.po so.po

2mtub 2mtub

0 0
Inpo, Inbr 2mkpo, 2mkbr Inpo, Inbr 2mkpo, 2mkbr 0

5.83 SL 5.77 SL
5.77 SL
6.13 SL 6.05 SL 6.15 SL 6.13 LS

2f ,2mtub 2co,2f, 2vftub 3vf,3f, Imtub 2f 2m 2vftub 2f,lm tub
2f,2m tub 2f,2m tub
3f,2m tub 3f,2m tub

0 0
v l n P°
3nbr, Imkbr 3nbr, 2rnkbr, Inpo 4nbr, 2kbrw 4nbr, 2mkbr, Ikbrw 3nbr, 2mkbr« 2n-mk coats 0

6.26 SL 6.29 SL 6.12 SL 5.94 SL 6.21 SL
SL SL
.- SL LS S

so.po so,po so.po so.po so.po so,po so.po
so.po so.po so.po so,po so.po
so.po so.po
so.po so.po so.po

0 0
0 0 0
0

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A31

Supplementary Table 1. Field descriptions Continued

No. Sample

Horizon

Sasal depth (cm)

Lower

Moist

boundary color

94 RIO 95 96 97
98 99

A IIB1 IIB2H IIB221
IIIB3t IIICox

0-46

c,s 10YR3/3

46-70

c,w 7.5YR4/4

70-140 g,i 7.5YR4/6, 5YR4/4
140-210 g,i 7.5YR4/6, 5YR4/4

210-386 g,w 7.5YR4/4

386-500 g,w 10YR4/4

Consistence
Dry color Texture Structure Dry nuiii WCL

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka

10YR6/3 10YR6/4 7.5YR6/6 7.5YR6/6

SL SL+ SL+ SL

2 co sbk 2 co pr 3 v co sbk 3 v co sbk

sh vh eh eh

so.po ss.ps
s,p s,p

10YR6/6, 7.5YR4/4 10YR5/4

SL SL

3 v co sbk sg

eh vh

ss.po so.po

KUUIS Pores
1m 3m,2co tub
1m 2m,lco tub lco,3m tub 3m,lco tub

Clay films

PH

Assumed Parent Material
Wet

0
3nbr
3mkbr, 3mkpo 3mkbr, Ikpo, 2mkpf 2mkbr, 2mkpo 2mkbr, 2mkpo

6.20 6.83 7.17 7.47
7.47

SL SL SL SL
SL SL

so.po so,po so.po so.po
so.po so.po

100 R32 101 102 103 104
105 106 107

All A12 A3 B2H B22t
831t IIB32 IIICox

0-26

g,w 10YR3/2

26-50

c,w 10YR3/3

50-70

c,w 7.5YR3/4

70-105 g,w 7.5YR4/4

105-150 g,w 7.5YR4/5

150-220 220-354 354-360+

d,w g.w

7.5YR4/4 10YR5/4

10YR6/3
10YR6/3
10YR6/3, 7.5YR5/4 7.5YR5/4
7.5YR5/4

SL SL SL SL+ SCL

7.5YR5/4

SL+ SL S+

m, 1 f sbk m, 2 m sbk m, 2 f sbk 1 m sbk 1 co sbk

sh sh h h vh

m,l co sbk sg sg

h

fr so.ps fr ss.po fr ss.po fi s,ps fi s,ps
fi s.ps vfr ss.po lo so.po

If, Ivf If, Ivf
If

3fir,lvf tub 2m,2f, 3vftub lm,2f, 3vftub 3vf,2f tub 2vf,lf tub
If, Ivf tub 2vftub
"

0
0
0
Inbr
4nbr, Ikpf, 3mkbrw 3nbr, Imkbrw Inbrw, Imkbrw v : nbr

6.41 6.28 6.26 6.18 6.56

SL SL SL SL SL
SL SL S

so.po so.po so.po so.po so.po
so,po so.po so.po

108 R30 109 110
111
112
113

Ap

49-65

a,w 7.5YR4/4

Bl

65-78

c,« 5YR4/4

B21t 78-127 g,« 5YR4/6

IIB22t

127-179 g,w 5YR5/6,

4/4

IIIB31

179-197 g,w 5YR5/6,

4/4

IIIClox 197-220 c,« 7.5YR4/4

IIBb 220+

Riverba

member, 330 Ka

10YR6/3 7.5YR5/6 5YR5/6
5YR5/6
7.5YR7/6
7.5YR6/6

SL SL+ SCL
SCL
SL
SL+

m m,l co abk 2 co sbk
2 co abk
m
m

sh h vh vh
sh

vfr so.po fi ss.ps fi s,ps
fi s,p
fr ss.po
vfr so.po

3vf,2fir Ivfir 2fir
2f1r
2fir

0 2nbr 3nbr, 2npf Ikpf, 4mkbr
3nbr, Ikbr 2nbr, Imkbrw 0

6.45 6.00 5.75
5.90
6.45
6.95

SL SL SL
SL
SL
SL

so.po so.po so.po
so.po
so.po
so.po

114 T2 115 116
117

A B21 IIB22
me

0-31 31-173 173-386
386-417

g i
i

5YR3/4 2.5YR3/6
7.5YR5/6, 2.5YR3/6
2.5YR5/8, 5YR5/6

Tijrlock Lake Formati<)n, 600 Ka

coSL m sbk CL co abk SL m-co abk
S 1 m sbk

vfi vfi
vfi

0

6.58

SL

0

5.82

SL

--

0 6.52 SL

0

6.48

S

--

118 T6 119 120
121
122
123 Til 124 125 126 127
128 129 130 131 132

All A12 IIB2U
IIB22t
IIIB+C

0-20 20-40
40-90

g,« 10YR3/4 a,i 10YR3/4
g,« 5YR3/6

90-190 g,« 2.5YR3/6

190-370 g,« 2.5-5YR, 3/4
and 30* 10YR5/4

10YR4/4 10YR5/3
5YR4/8

LS LS
LS

2.5YR3/4, 3/6
2.5YR3/6, 4/6
10YR6/4

SCL coSL

2 med pr sg

sh h h sh

fr so.po fr so.po fi s,ps
vfi vs,p
fi ss.po

3f 2f

Allp IIA12p IIA+B
IIBlt
IIB2t

0-5 5-11 11-20
20-33
33-80

a g
g
g

IIIB3U
IVB32t
VB+C
VClox VIC2ox

80-191
191-256
256-292
292-375 375+

g g g g

10YR3/2 10YR3/3 5YR4/4, 7.5YR4/4 2.5YR3/6
2.5YR4/4, 3/6
2.5YR4/4
5YR4/4, 2.5YR4/4 5YR4/4, 5YR5/6 5YR4/6 7.5YR4/5

10YR5/2 10YR5/3 7.5YR5/4, 10YR6/3 5YR4/6
5YR5/6, 4/6
5YR5/6
5YR6/6
5YR6/6
7.5YR6/6

SL SL SCL
SCL
SCL
SCL SL+
SL-
SLLS

2 co abk 2 m sbk
m m m m sg

sh h h
h
vh

fr so.po fr so.po fi ss.ps
fi s,p
vfi vs.pv
fi s,p
fr s.p
vfr ss.ps
vfr ss.ps so.po

3mir 3m,3co tub 2m
2cotub
2co,lf tub

0 0
Smkpo, 3mkbr, 2mkpf 2kpf, 3mkpo, 3mkbr 2mkpo, 2mkbr

6.50 6.00 7.00
6.20
6.60

LS LS LS
LS
coSL

so.po so.po so.po
so.po
so.po

2f,2vfir
2f,vf tub 3vfir
3vf,3f ir 2fir
2fir
Iftub

0 0 0
4nbr
4mkbr, 3mkpo, 3kpow 4mkbr, 3mkpf 2mkpf, 4nbr 3nbr
3nbr 0

6.82 6.95 6.85
6.70
6.60
6.90
7.10
6.95
7.00 7.15

SL SL SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
LS LS

so.po so,po so.po
so.po
so,po
so po
so.po
so.po
so.po so,po

A32 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 1. Field descriptions Continued

No. Sample
133 CH1 134 135 136
137 138 139

Horizon

Basal depth (cm)

Lower

Moist

bounda ry color

01 Al AB
IIB2H

1-0 a,s

0-12

g,w 10YR5/4,

7.5YR4/4

12-53

a.w 7.5YR4/4,

kroto. 2.5YR4/4

53-140 g,w 2.5YR3/6,

4/6

IIB22t
IIB3H IIB32t

140-234 g,i
234-310 g,i 310-350+ --

10YR4/7,
cr. coats 2.5YR4/8, skins 10R3/6, 10R4/8, 5Y-5GY4/1 10R3/6, 4/8

Consistence
Dry color Texture Structure Dry Moist Wet

Roots Pores

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

7.5YR6/6, slgr

L

7.5YR6/6, slgr

kroto.

SiL

2.5YR4/4

5YR4/8,

grC

2.5YR3/6,

4/8,

skinslOR

3/6, 4/8

2.5YR4/8, grC

skins

10R4/8,

1DR3/6

2.5YR4/8, grco

gr. stains C

10R4/8

2.5YR3/6, grco

5YR6/8,

C-

stains

10R4/8,gley

10YR8/2

If sbk If sbk 2 m sbk
2 m sbk
1 m sbk 1 m sbk

sh -- ss.ps 2f, 2m
sh -- ss.ps 2f, 2m

exh --

vs.pv

1m

exh --

vs.ps

--

vs.pv vs.pv

--

2m,2co tub 2m, 2co tub 2mtub
2mtub
Imtub

140 CH2 141 142 143 144
145
146 147

Al

0-8

c,w 7.5YR4/4

10YR6/4

slgr

2 f sbk

h

fr ss.po 2f,

L 2vf

A3

8-30

g,w 7.5YR4/6

10YR6/4

slgr

2 f sbk

h

fr s,po 2f

L

A+B

30-50

a.s 5YR4/4

7.5YR6/4 slgr

1 f sbk

h

fr s.ps If

CL

IIB2H

50-110 g,w 2.5YR4/6,

5YR5/6

grC

m

vh fi vs,p --

2.5YR4/6

IIB22

110-170 c,w 2.5YR4/6,

2.5YR4/6 grC

m

eh fi vs,pv --

somelOYR

8/8

IIB23

170-200 g,w 2.5YR3/6,

2.5YR4/6, grCL

m

eh fi vs.pv --

2.5YR4/6

2.5YR4/B,

5Y8/2

IIB24

200-290 g,w 2.5YR4/8,

10R4/6,

grC

m

eh fi vs.pv --

10R4/6

2.5YR4/8

IIB3 290-350

grC m

eh fi vs.pv

2co,3f tub 3m,3f, 2vftub 2m, 3f tub 2f,3vf tub Ivftub
Ivftub
Ivftub

8+C or Cox

750-1000 d

7.5YR6/6, 10YR7/6 grLS sg clay 2.5YR4/6

lo lo ss.po 4kco

CH3 148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155 156

Ao 1.5-0

Al

0-9

c,w 7.5YR4/4

7.5YR6/4 slgr

2 m sbk

h

fr ss.po 3f,

L 1m

A3

9-35 g,w 7.5YR3/4

7.5YR6/4 slgr

2 m sbk

sh

fr ss.po 3f

L

A+B

35-68

a,w 5YR4/4

5YR6/4

slgr 1 m sbk

h

fr ss.ps 3f

L+

IIB2t

68-105 g.w 2.5YR4/6 5YR5/6 grC m

h fr so.po 2f,

2vf

IIIB221 105-153 g,w 10R3/6,

2.5YR4/8 grC

m

h fr s.ps 2f

2.5YR5/8

IVB23

153-173 c,w 2.5YR4/8,

2.5YR4/8 grC

m

vh fi vs.pv --

5Y6/1

VB24

173-260 g,w 10R4/8,

10YR4/6, slgr

m

eh fi vs.pv

7.5YR6/6

7.5YR4/6 L

VIB31 VI32

260-340 g,w 340-750+ --

10R3/6 10R3/6

10R3/6 10R3/6

grSCL grCL

m m

fr s,ps

3f,lm tub 3f,2m, 2vftub
2f,3m, 2vftub 2f,3m, 2vftub 3f,3vf tub 3vftub

Clay films

Assumed Parent Material
Wet PH Texture consistence

0
2npo, 2nbr
3k po, 3kbr, 3kpf
4kpo, 4kbr, 4kpf
2mkbr, 2mkpo, 2mkco Imkbr, Imkco

4.84 4.93
4.55

L L
L

4.40

L

4.00 4.06

L L

ss.ps ss.ps ss.ps
so.po
so, po so.po

0
2n-mkpo
2mkpo-br, 2npo-br 2mkbr, 3mkpo 4kbr, 4kco
4kbr, 4kco
4kbr, 4kco 4kbr, 4kco Inbr,

4.71 4.55 4.17 4.36 4.20
4.12
4.14 4.14

L L L L LS
LS
LS LS LS

ss.po ss.po ss.po ss.po ss.po
ss.po
ss.po ss.po so.po

0
0
2mkpo
3mk-kpo, 3mkco 4kbr, 4kco 4kbr, 4kco 4kbr, 4kco 3mkbr 3mkbr

5.84 5.44 5.01 4.62 4.48 4.06 4.33 4.20 4.10

L L L L SL SL SL SL SL

ss.po ss.po ss.po so,po so.po so.po so.po so.po so, po

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A33

Supplementary Table 2. Physical properties
[Analysts: A.J. Busacca, Peter Janitsky, and R. Meixner, University of California, DavisJ

No. Sample Horizon

Percentage of <2-mm fraction

Basal

Total vco co m fi+vfi

<2-jj <l-ji Bulk

depth >2-mm sand sand sand sand sand Silt clay clay density

(cm) (g/cm3 )

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 3 MRA3 4 MRA4

5 PM15 6 PM15 7 PM15 8 PM15 9 PM15 10 PM15
11 PM19 12 PM19 13 PM19 14 PM19 15 PM19 16 PM19 17 PM19 18 PM19

Al 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5ox
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C35C3ox 6C4n 7C5n 8C6n

4 19 42 47 51 51+
7 12 23 43 49 55 66 80+

Modern River Alluvium
Post-Modesto deposits, .2 Ka 0 87.1 0.1 11.1 21.8 54.1 10.0 2.9 2.3 0 80.5 0.4 2.6 7.4 70.3 15.4 4.1 3.4 1.43 0 92.4 0.1 5.2 18.2 68.9 4.9 2.7 2.5 __ 0 87.3 0.0 3.0 7.7 76.5 9.1 3.6 2.3 1.41 0 95.4 0.2 19.4 41.7 34.1 3.2 1.4 1.0 0 90.0 0.0 2.1 11.7 76.1 6.7 3.3 2.4 1.37 0 71.1 0.1 2.5 12.4 56.1 27.0 6.9 5.1 1.29 0 68.6 0.1 2.3 11.9 54.3 71.3 7.0 5.4 1.47 0 75.5 0.2 2.6 13.1 59.6 19.3 5.2 4.2 1.32 0 46.3 0.3 1.9 4.8 39.3 43.9 9.8 7.2 1.42 0 85.9 0.0 0.1 1.6 84.1 11.4 2.7 2.4 1.40 0 63.4 0.6 9.7 14.1 39.0 31.0 5.6 4.6 1.39 0 89.9 0.2 17.9 45.4 26.4 7.7 2.4 1.8 0 30.4 0.0 0.4 1.7 28.3 59.9 9.7 6.7 1.36

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 PM8 22 PM8
23 PM13 24 PM13 25 PM13 26 PM13 27 PM13 £9OQ PM13 29 PM13
30 PM14 31 PM14 32 PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 38 PM16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PM16 42 PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 PM18 50 PM18 51 PM18 52 PM18 53 PM18

Al 2C1 3C2 4C3
All A12 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5n
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4ox 7C5n
A Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox 5C5ox br Cp6/"n
A 2Clox 2C2ox 2C3ox 3C4n
A 2Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox

Post-Modesto deposits, 3 Ka
32 0 36.4 0.2 2.6 2.6 33.7 52.8 13.5 10.0 1.24 55 0 55.4 0.0 0.2 1.2 50.4 41.1 5.9 3.8 1.21 66 0 81.5 0.1 1.8 14.6 65.0 12.5 4.2 3.0 1.30 76+ 0 92.9 0.0 3.7 27.4 61.4 3.8 2.7 1.2
5 0 38.5 0.0 0.0 0.9 37.0 49.9 12.1 9.5 1.17 35 0 44.8 0.1 2.0 3.8 39.0 37.8 10.2 7.2 1.27 86 0 72.9 0.1 2.3 6.2 64.2 23.2 3.9 2.2 1.39 112 0 81.7 0.0 0.6 4.4 76.6 15.6 2.8 2.0 1.31 136 0 200 0 720 0
3 0 50.1 0.0 0.9 1.8 47.4 39.1 10.8 7.2 33 0 39.1 0.1 1.3 2.3 35.4 49.7 11.2 7.8 1.28 99 0 71.1 0.0 4.2 7.3 59.2 23.4 5.5 3.9 1.39 130 0 80.3 0.1 2.3 5.7 72.2 15.4 4.3 3.0 1.41 175 0 71.7 0.4 3.2 2.9 65.3 22.6 5.7 3.9 1.40 200 0 85.7 0.4 6.0 9.0 70.3 10.6 3.7 2.8 1.38 230+ 0 96.5 4.5 58.6 24.3 9.1 2.8 0.7 0.6
2 0 73.7 0.1 0.2 4.7 68.3 19.9 6.4 4.8 * 25 0 74.9 0.0 0.3 3.7 70.9 18.9 6.2 4.5 1.38 35 0 75.1 0.0 0.2 3.7 71.1 19.5 5.4 4.6 1.40 65 0 83.3 0.0 0.5 6.6 76.1 12.4 4.3 3.8 1.35 90 0 92.5 0.0 1.7 21.8 69.1 5.6 1.9 1.8 116 0 82.9 0.0 0.2 4.3 78.5 13.9 3.2 2.3 1.37 o£o0c0 0
6 0 74.6 0.2 2.3 7.0 65.0 22.5 2.9 1.2 45 0 74.1 0.1 1.7 6.6 65.8 21.0 5.0 3.9 1.34 63 0 73.0 0.0 0.4 1.3 71.3 21.3 5.7 4.4 1.24 74 0 64.2 0.0 0.1 1.5 62.5 28.9 6.9 4.8 1.22 120+ 0 85.9 0.0 0.3 6.0 79.6 10.9 3.2 2.6 1.34
6 0 70.1 0.5 5.1 13.7 50.9 21.3 8.6 6.8 __ 65 0 77.7 1.0 6.5 13.4 57.0 18.2 4.1 2.9 1.53 115 0 83.0 1.3 8.5 18.5 54.5 13.3 3.7 2.6 1.53 164 0 90.4 1.1 11.4 28.1 49.8 7.0 2.6 2.3 1.52 175+ 10 88.7 0.7 9.6 31.1 47.3 9.0 2.3 1.7

A34 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 2. Physical properties Continued

No. Sample Horizon

Basal

Total

depth >2-mm sand

(cm)

Percentage of <2-mm fraction

VCO CO

m fi+vfi

<2-j,

sand sand sand sand Silt clay

<1-JJ Bulk clay density
(g/cm3 )

54 M31 55 M31 56 M31 57 M31 58 M31
59 M46 60 M46 61 M46 62 M46 63 M46

All A12 AC 2C1 3C2
Allp A12p 2A13p 3AC 4Cox

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

20 0.0 53.6 0.0 0.7 4.0 48.5 36.8 8.8 6.1 1.26

63 0.0 61.5 0.1 0.6 4.1 54.8 31.9 4.8 2.2 1.28

150 0.0 67.7

28.1 4.2 1.7 1.43

200 0.0 62.2 0.0 0.4 2.5 55.7 27.7 6.5 4.1 1.52

254 0.0 83.0 0.0 1.3 10.1 68.7 11.6 3.6 2.1 1.42

5 0 68.6 0.8 9.7 13.4 44.7 25.8 5.6 4.4 14 0 63.7 0.9 10.9 13.5 38.3 30.0 6.9 4.7 1.61
32 0 65.3 0.7 10.4 13.9 40.4 28.9 5.8 4.6 1.66 66 0 58.2 0.5 7.0 12.4 38.7 33.6 8.2 6.0 1.65 250 0 60.1 0.1 4.5 12.8 42.7 31.2 8.7 6.4 1.62

64 M12 65 M12 66 M12 67 M12 68 M12
69 M12 70 M12

All A12 2B21t 3B22t 4B3
5C1 6C2

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka

15 0

81 0 80.5 2.3 24.4 17.2 36.6 13.5 6.0 3.3

102 0 87.4 1.1 21.3 15.7 34.9 1.4 11.2 7.6

170 0 78.9 2.7 22.7 15.5 31.3 4.0 16.8 15.8

201 0 85.9 2.6 27.0 17.6 33.5 7.8 6.3 4.2

231 0 90.6 3.9 39.2 19.0 27.0 6.1 3.3 1.6

413+ 0 97.0

2.2 0.8 0.4

1.68 1.68 1.89 1.85

71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9 76 R9 77 R9
78 R33 79 R33 80 R33 81 R33 82 R33 83 R33 84 R33 85 R33 86 R33 87 R33

Allp Al2p Bl 2B21 2B22 3B3 4C
All 2A12 3A3 3B21t 3B22t 3B23t 3B31 3B32 4B33 5Cox

88 R2 89 R2 90 R2 91 R2 92 R2 93 R2
94 RIO 95 RIO 96 RIO 97 RIO 98 RIO 99 RIO
100 R32 101 R32 102 R32 103 R32 104 R32 105 R32 106 R32 107 R32

Ap B21 B22t B3 Cl C2
A 2B1 2B21t 2B22t 3B3t 3Cox
All A12 A3 B21t B22t B31t 2B32 3Cox

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka

30 0 73.2 2.8 24.5 16.0 17.6 19.6 7.2 4.5
60 0 71.4 2.4 24.0 16.4 26.7 21.3 7.3 4.3
105 0 68.0 2.2 22.5 16.4 26.7 19.4 12.6 10.0 180 0 64.0 1.8 18.8 15.9 26.9 15.2 20.8 18.2 235 0 73.5 4.3 29.8 17.4 20.7 12.8 13.7 11.8 350 0 72.8 6.4 36.4 17.7 15.6 14.2 13.0 11.6 400+ 20 87.9 16.5 32.6 18.6 19.6 5.8 6.8 6.2

4 0 70.3 4.4 24.3 14.6 51.7 23.2 6.5 4.4

19 0 58.2 3.4 18.5 11.8

36.1 5.7 3.5

39 0 67.8 4.6 22.5 13.7

23.0 9.2 6.8

62 0 60.4 3.1 19.1 12.3

21.9 17.7 14.8

83 0 57.0 2.9 17.7 11.8

18.0 25.0 21.9

122 0 59.2 2.7 18.0 12.6

15.6 25.2 22.4

151 0 69.8 3.5 22.7 16.3

12.3 17.9 16.0

210

71.9 4.3 24.1 16.0

15.6 12.5 11.0

260

79.4 19.5 31.5 13.1

7.5 13.1 12.6

300+ 0 90.7 8.9 40.7 20.7

2.1 7.2 6.6

1.75 1.75 1.84 1.93 1.84 1.88 1.42
1.57 1.73 1.77 2.03 2.04 2.01 1.89 1.97 1.94

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka
25 0 81 0 185 0 386 0 500 0 500+ 0
46 0 73.4 3.8 24.1 14.4 32.3 19.3 7.3 5.2 70 0 68.1 5.7 30.4 12.4 22.9 18.8 13.1 11.5 140 0 68.4 5.6 30.0 12.9 22.5 18.0 13.6 11.1 210 0 72.9 6.1 33.3 13.7 22.9 14.9 12.2 10.2 386 0 77.6 10.2 39.8 7.9 19.4 9.8 11.6 9.8 500 0
26 0 72.4 2.6 19.0 16.1 34.7 20.6 7.0 4.4 50 0 73.0 2.4 19.7 16.0 35.0 19.2 7.8 5.2 70 0 69.4 2.2 18.2 15.2 43.8 19.9 10.7 7.6 105 0 64.7 2.1 16.7 14.5 31.3 19.2 16.1 13.2 150 0 63.7 1.8 17.0 14.8 30.2 16.7 19.6 16.7 220 0 69.1 1.7 17.9 16.4 33.1 13.7 17.2 14.7 354 0 76.7 2.1 24.1 20.4 30.1 8.5 14.8 14.5 360+ 0 88.0 7.9 42.8 17.7 19.6 4.2 8.0 7.6

1.43 1.57 2.01 1.86 1.72
1.80 1.86 1.92 1.93 1.85
1.67 1.63 1.86 2.05 2.06 1.96 1.82

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A35

Supplementary Table 2. Physical properties Continued

No. Sample Horizon

108 R30 109 R30 110 R30 111 R30 112 R30 113 R30

Ap BIO B21t 2B22t 3B3t SClox

Percentage of <2-mm fraction

Basal

Total VCO

CO

m fi+vfi

<2-^ <!-) Bulk

depth >2-mm sand sand sand sand sand Silt clay clay density

(cm) (g/cm3 )

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka
65 0 75.0 2.0 21.4 18.7 32.9 19.0 8.0 6.6 78 0 66.7 1.4 19.9 16.0 29.4 14.2 19.1 17.0 127 0 63.5 1.4 17.7 15.2 29.2 11.1 25.4 24.6 179 0 69.8 5.7 29.8 15.2 19.1 5.0 25.2 25.1 197 0 78.2 5.9 37.6 18.5 16.2 3.3 18.5 18.4 220 0 77.5 4.6 34.1 19.9 18.9 2.5 20.0 18.8

1.71 1.97 1.95 1.93
1.85

114 T2 115 T2 116 T2 117 T2
118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6 122 T6
123 Til 124 Til 125 Til 126 Til 127 Til 128 Til 129 Til 130 Til 131 Til 132 Til
133 CH1 134 CH1 135 CH1 136 CH1 137 CH1 138 CH1 139 CH1
140 CH2 141 CH2 142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2 145 CH2 146 CH2 147 CH2
148 CH3 149 CH3 150 CH3 151 CHS 152 CHS 153 CHS 154 CHS 155 CHS 156 CHS
157 CH4 158 CH4

A B21 2B22 3C
All A12 2B2H 2B22t 3B+C
Allp 2A12p 2A+B 2BH 2B2t 3B31t 4B32t 5B+C 5Clox 6C2ox
Al 2AB 2B2H 2B22t 2B31 2B32 3B33
Al A3 2A+B 2B21t 2B22 2B23 3B24 3B3
Al A3 A+B B2t B22t 2B23 3B24 4B31 5B32
2B31 4Clox

Turlock Lake Formation, 600 Ka

31

0 67.9 4.1 21.4 13.4 25.9 26.6 5.5 2.4

_

173 0 44.1 2.8 15.3 8.7 16.1 18.2 37.7 35.0

386 0 70.6 4.0 14.1 6.7 42.1 17.0 12.4 11.1 1.90

417 0 89.3 20.2 42.3 10.5 14.2 4.5 6.2 5.6

20 0 85.6 19.1 31.7 17.5 17.3 10.1 4.3 3.4 ^ _ 40 0 83.3 15.2 29.2 18.1 20.8 11.5 5.3 4.3 _ 90 0 83.3 29.6 37.6 10.9 5.2 7.4 9.3 7.2 190 0 68.1 19.8 33.1 8.8 6.4 4.8 27.1 27.1 370 0 79.9 12.3 43.6 16.0 8.0 7.9 12.2 2.2 ~

5 0 79.1 6.6 26.4 18.6 27.5 14.1 5.4 3.5 1.49 11 0 74.4 10.2 25.0 14.5 24.7 16.4 7.1 4.4 1.85 20 0 63.1 8.0 19.7 13.2 22.2 15.1 20.9 17.3 1.91 33 0 58.0 6.9 19.1 11.3 20.7 12.0 28.9 24.5 1.88
80 0 64.3 7.4 21.8 13.8 21.3 8.6 26.0 23.8 1.95 191 0 76.0 13.2 22.3 17.8 22.7 3.0 20.0 18.3 1.81 256 0 79.2 5.6 19.1 24.8 29.7 2.5 18.3 18.0 1.81 292 0 84.5 10.5 38.9 19.7 15.4 1.0 13.9 12.6 1.76 375 0 84.2 9.2 33.6 21.9 19.5 0.8 14.2 13.5 _ 375+ 0 86.4 15.7 41.7 18.3 10.7 1.7 11.8 11.2

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

12 20 37.7 9.8 7.4 3.3 17.4 46.0 16.5 13.6 53 20 34.1 5.2 6.3 3.5 19.1 43.3 22.7 19.0 88 30 24.9 4.5 3.5 2.0 14.5 31.8 43.3 39.7 140 20 24.9 4.5 3.5 2.0 14.5 20.4 55.8 52.8 234 30.7 9.2 6.0 3.2 14.8 26.4 42.9 36.7 310 24.2 6.0 4.3 2.6 11.6 20.6 55.2 49.7 350 41.0 12.6 15.4 3.0 7.6 18.4 40.6 34.3

8 30 50 110 170 200 290 350
9 35 68 105 153 173 260 340 750+
750 1000

20 48.9 6.2 8.1 4.3 30.3 38.8 12.5 8.6 10 40.3 5.6 6.6 3.8 24.3 35.6 24.0 20.0 10 35.6 3.1 6.0 3.7 22.8 33.7 30.7 26.7 30 25.6 3.4 4.2 2.4 15.7 21.5 52.9 49.8 20 34.2 6.2 8.7 3.9 15.3 18.6 46.9 43.3 10 37.8 5.9 10.2 4.6 17.0 23.0 39.2 35.1 20 29.3 6.5 10.3 3.0 9.4 24.8 45.9 40.9 30 30.9 7.0 10.2 3.8 9.8 24.3 44.8 40.0
20 44.0 6.2 7.8 5.1 24.8 41.7 14.3 10.4 10 41.9 4.5 7.5 5.1 24.9 38.0 20.0 15.7 10 39.1 3.5 7.5 4.8 23.3 35.6 25.2 20.1 50 26.4 3.0 4.5 3.1 15.8 26.2 47.5 43.0 40 21.4 2.8 4.6 3.0 10.9 16.1 62.6 60.2 20 30.3 1.9 5.0 10.0 13.2 12.0 57.7 54.7 10 47.5 10.5 15.6 6.1 15.2 29.0 23.5 20.5 30 60.8 5.9 18.0 16.8 20.2 10.1 29.1 24.6 30 29.9 7.2 9.2 3.7 9.8 30.5 39.6 32.5
50.5 8.0 25.4 5.6 11.6 23.0 26.5 21.3 63.1 2.9 25.0 17.3 17.9 18.0 18.9 14.8

1.64 1,60 1.49 1.65 1.84 1.92 1.54
1.68
1.67 1.66 1.74 1.82 1.75 --
1.53 1.67 1.72 1.67 1.73 1.84 1.81 1.75 1.82
1.71 1.61

A36 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 3, Part 1. Extractive chemical analyses

[CEC, cation-exchange capacity; m, with magnetic minerals; w, without magnetic minerals. Analysts: A. L. Walker, U.S. Geological Survey, and A.J. Busacca, Peter Janitsky, and R. Meixner, University of California, Davis]

Basal Percentage of <2-mm

mg/100 g soil

No. Sample Horizon depth Total Organic Exchange Exchange Exchange Exchange Exchange

(cm) N

C

Na K

Ca Mg N CEC

PH 1:1H 2 0

pH pH 1:1KC1 Saturated

Modern River Alluvium

1 MRA1 --

-- --

-- --

--

--

--

-- -- --

--

--

2 MRA2 ~

~-

-- --

-

--

--

- -- --

--

--

3 MR A3 --

--

-- .

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

4 MRA4 --

- --

-- --

--

-

--

-- -- --

--

-

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

5 PM15 Al

4 0.0371 0.54

0.39

0.23

3.84

2.93

1.29 4.83 5.84

5.25

__

6 PM15 2Clox 19 0.0428 0.44

0.41

0.14

4.04

3.23

1.69 6.66 5.69

4.68

7 PM15 3C2ox 42 0.0255 0.14

0.41

0.09

3.13

1.92

1.33 3.25 5.56

4.37

8 PM15 4C3ox 47 0.0226 0.20

0.42

0.11

4.54

2.63

1.08 5.99 5.55

4.75

9 PM15 5C4ox 51 0.0097 0.08

0.39

0.05

2.83

1.82

0.64 1.66 5.72

5.01

10 PM15 6C5ox 51+ 0.0205 0.14

0.41

0.07

4.34

3.03

1.04 4.91 5.82

5.03

~

11 PM19 All

7 0.2790 3.81

__

__

__ 4.99 __ 5.56 5.12 _

12 PM19 2A12

12 0.1443 1.62

2.57 6.25 5.85

13 PM19 3Clox 23 0.0983 1.10

-_ 1.85 6.32 5.87

14 PM19 4C2ox 43 0.0635 0.60

--

1.53 6.91 6.30

15 PM19 5C3ox 49 0.0185 0.52

..

._

0.72 6.79 6.33

16 PM19 6C4n 17 PM19 7C5n

55 0.0322 66 0.0121

0.31 0.08

1.33 6.98 6.36 -- 0.64 6.54 6.22

18 PM19 8C6n

80+

1.41 --

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 PM8 22 PM8
23 PM13 24 PM13 25 PM13 26 PM13 27 PM13 28 PM13 29 PM13
30 PM14 31 PM14 32 PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 38 PM16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PM16 42 PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 PM18 50 PM18 51 PM18 52 PM18 53 PM18

Al 2C1 3C2 4C3
All A12 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5n
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4ox 7C5n
A Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox 5C5ox 5C6n
A 2C2ox 2C2ox 2C3ox 3C4n
A 2Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox

32 0.199 55 0.049 66 0.038 76+ 0.018
5 0.2609 35 0.0877 86 0.0278 112 0.0187 136 200 720
3 0.2429 33 0.0942 99 0.0301 130 0.0153 175 0.0242 200 0.0146 239+ 0.0077
2 0.2215 25 0.0670 35 0.0404 65 0.0273 90 0.0124 116 0.0169 236
6 0.2098 45 0.0594 63 0.0378 74 0.0439 120+ 0.0175
6 0.3966 65 0.0358 115 0.0245 164 0.0260 175+ 0.0145

2.26 0.66 0.41 0.13
3.26 0.99 0.32 0.30
--
2.91 1.21 1.00 0.30 0.25 0.11 0.04
2.64 0.58 0.48 0.34 0.12 0.16 ~
2.14 0.62 0.44 0.50 0.18
3.69 0.37 0.25 0.10 0.12

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka 0.18 1.76 15.30 2.53 0.13 0.17 11.01 2.52 0.22 0.22 5.25 3.13 0.04 0.15 3.84 1.61 ._ .. __ ._
-- -- -__ ._ ._
0.49 0.88 8.79 2.94 0.53 0.63 6.26 3.13 0.53 0.14 7.58 3.03 0.53 0.14 6.46 3.12 0.49 0.07 4.14 2.83 0.23 0.07 6.06 5.56 0.79 0.07 6.87 6.26 __ __ _ _
-- -- ~ __ __ __ __

4.66 22.73 1.25 13.82 0.76 7.08 0.84 3.66
4.10 __ 1.04 0.84 1.45
~
2.65 __ 0.32 0.48 1.21 1.45 1.13 0.24 ~
2.29 12.57 1.53 9.07 0.96 9.41 0.48 7.57 0.32 3.50 1.45 5.83 0.64 8.91
2.05 __ 1.04 0.36 0.36 0.16
2.21 __ 1.29 1.57 1.04 0.84

6.33 7.20 7.33 7.48
6.30 7.71 7.85 7.35
~
6.42 7.83 7.83 6.88 6.54 6.66 6.92
6.50 6.48 6.86 7.29 7.29 7.22 7.42
6.61 6.99 7.18 8.03 7.83
7.26 5.69 5.75 5.98 6.18

5.72 . _ 6.36 7.13 6.72 --
5.89 6.93 6.67 5.90
-- --
5.99 __ 7.12 6.62 5.42 5.11 5.32 5.52 --
6.00 _ 5.68 6.33 6.70 6.89 6.95 ~
6.25 _ 6.32 6.65 7.42 7.36 --
6.92 __ 5.54 4.64 4.77 5.10

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A37

Supplementary Table 3, Part 1. Extractive chemical analyses Continued

Basal Percentage of <2-mm

No. Sample Horizon depth Total Organic Exchange

(cm) N

C

Na

mgyiOO g soil Exchange Exchange Exchange
K Ca Mg

Exchange N

CEC

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

54 M31

All

20 0.101 1.23 0.32

1.83 11.82

1.81

1.37 15.23

55 M31

A12

63 0.041 0.45 7.42

1.13

5.45

1.32

0.04 9.32

56 M31 AC 150 0.022 0.21 8.38 0.97 2.42 0.51 0.00 6.83

57 M31

2C1

200 0.018

0.13

8.68

0.22

1.62

0.80

0.68 7.24

58 M31

3C2

254 0.011

0.06

2.99

0.10

1.92

1.11

0.80 3.58

59 M46

Allp

5 0.1881

2.24

0.53

0.76

7.37

2.22

2.01 10.57

60 M46 Al2p

14 0.0959

1.00

0.44

0.53

5.86

1.31

1.37 8.74

61 M46

2Al3p 32 0.0544

0.52

0.25

0.48

4.65

1.11

1.00 6.65

62 M46

SAC

66 0.0331

0.26

0.26

0.54

4.95

1.41

0.92 7.33

63 M46 4Cox 250 0.0206 0.11

0.26

0.28

6.16

1.52

0.76 8.41

PH 1:1H 2 0
7.62 9.64 10.00 10.01 9.64
6.29 6.76 6.80 7.01 7.04

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka

64 Ml 2 All

15 _

--

_ __ _

65 Ml 2

A12

81 0.025 0.23 0.13

0.24

3.43

0.11

1.42 2.91 6.45

66 Ml 2 2B21t 102 0.019 0.16 0.28 0.13 3.74 1.21 2.11 4.33 6.87

67 Ml 2

3B22t 170 0.020

0.10

0.19

0.10

6.67

2.12

2.35 7.99 6.67

68 Ml 2 4B3 201 0.012 0.40 0.14 0.08 4.95 2.37 1.26 5.83 6.98

69 M12

5C1

231 0.006

0.40

0.65

0.06

3.74

1.21

1.22 3.91 7.34

70 Ml 2 6C2

413+

0.02

--

71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9 76 R9 77 R9
78 R33 79 R33 80 R33 81 R33 82 R33 83 R33 84 R33 85 R33 86 R33 87 R33

Allp 30 0.044 0.36

Al2p 60 0.040 0.29

Bl 105 --

0.15

2B21 180

0.08

2B22 235 3B3 350 -_

0.04 0.03

4C 400+

0.03

All 4 0.1261 1.53 2A12 19 0.0492 0.47 3A3 39 0.0248 0.16 3B21t 62 0.0229 0.06 3B22t 83 0.0240 0.06
3B23t 122 3B31 151 3B32 210 4B33 260 -. 5Cox 300+ --

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka
0.13 0.22 2.73 0.40 0.09 0.11 3.23 0.00 0.11 0.08 3.84 0.26 0.04 0.09 4.44 1.82 0.09 0.09 4.34 1.11 0.13 0.10 5.35 1.72 0.13 0.08 5.25 1.01
.. ._ ..
-. _. __
--

2.73 2.45 2.49 4.66 4.58 2.10 1.87
1.85 1.33 1.29 1.61 1.61 2.81 1.22 1.10 1.08 0.64

3.83 4.24 4.66 6.83 4.49 7.08 6.08
__

5.83 5.77 5.77 6.13 6.05 6.15 6.13
6.26 6.11 5.56 5.94 6.21

88 R2 89 R2 90 R2 91 R2 92 R2 93 R2
94 RIO 95 RIO 96 RIO 97 RIO 98 RIO 99 RIO
100 R32 101 R32 102 R32 103 R32 104 R32 105 R32 106 R32 107 R32

Ap 25 _ B21 81 -B22t 185
B3 386 Cl 500 C2n 500+ --

_ --

A 2B1
2B21t 2B22t 3B3t
3Cox

46 70 140 210 386
500

0.023 --

0.16 0.07
0.03
0.03 0.03 ~

All 26 0.0351 0.31 A12 50 0.0278 0.15 A3 70 0.0195 0.10 B21t 105 0.0200 0.08
B22t 150 0.0180 0.04
B31t 220 2B32 354 -. 3Cox 360+

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka
-- _ -_ .. -.
__
-- --

_ ~

0.13 0.22 3.53 0.01 1.74 0.06 0.23 3.43 0.81 1.71 0.19 0.10 4.65 2.11 2.47 0.15 0.08 3.64 2.72 1.46 0.19 0.08 4.75 1.82 1.10
--

0.17 0.32 3.54 0.50 1.29
0.26 0.23 3.03 0.61 1.00 0.25 0.22 3.23 0.71 1.13 0.22 0.24 3.33 1.32 1.53 0.25 0.23 4.54 1.01 1.93
0.25 0.20 3.94 1.41 1.21
0.31 0.22 4.34 1.52 0.48
0.36 0.14 3.84 1.51 0.48

_
3.00 4.33 6.49 5.91 5.58
4.83 3.83 3.91 4.74 6.08 4.99 5.49 3.66

._
~
6.20 6.82 7.17 7.47 7.47 --
6.41 6.28 6.26 6.18 6.56

108 R30
109 R30 110 R30 111 R30 112 R30 113 R30

Ap BIO B21t
2B22t 3B3t 3Clox

65
78 127 179
197 220

0.019 __ -~

0.18 ~~

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka
0.09 0.18 2.52 0.00 0.15 0.23 4.34 0.61 0.19 0.18 4.95 1.92 0.63 0.26 8.69 2.72 0.28 0.14 9.90 2.93 0.19 0.16 9.09 2.42

1.10
2.23 2.47
2.63 1.58 1.46

2.75 6.49 8.24 12.90 12.90 11.41

6.45 6.00 5.75 5.90 6.45 6.95

pH pH 1:1KC1 Saturated
6.83 _ 7.88 8.78 8.36 7.45 ~ 5.87 _ 6.06 6.23 6.23 5.80 ~~
_ 5.59 5.48 5.32 5.40 5.22
4.87 4.88 4.70 4.56 4.38 4.44 4.28 ~ 5.69 _ 5.54 5.11 4.60 4.86
_ _.
--
5.12 _ 5.08 4.98 4.98 5.32 ~ --
5.57 _ 5.41 4.99 4.77 4.85
--
4.73 6.6 4.49 6.1 4.21 5.8 4.11 6.0 4.62 6.8 4.90 7.0

A3 8 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 3, Part 1. Extractive chemical analyses Continued

Basal Percentage of <2-mm

mg/100 g soil

No. Sample Horizon depth Total Organic Exchange Exchange Exchange Exchange Exchange

(cm) N

C

Na K

Ca Mg N CEC

Turlock Lake Formation, 600 Ka

114 T2

A

31 0.037 0.38

0.08

0.27

2.73

0.50

1.87 3.50

115 T2 B21 173

0.17 0.11 0.26 4.65 1.81 4.16 8.91

116 T2 82 2 386

0.05 0.26 0.11 5.96 2.12 1.74 8.41

117 T2

3C

417

0.04 0.06 0.07 3.28 0.20 0.86 3.17

118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6
122 T6

All A12 2B21t 2B22t 3B+C

20 40
90 190
370

0.0364 0.0214
0.0091

--

0.27 0.28 3.33 0.00 _ 3.08

0.25 0.31 3.33 0.21

2.66

0.29 0.42 8.69 1.71

8.99

0.26 0.35 8.08 1.62

10.41

0.36 0.17 5.05 1.41 ~ 7.41

123 Til

Allp

5

_ 0.09 0.81 8.58 0.41 1.95 11.07

124 Til 2A12p 11 0.032 0.64

0.04

0.34

3.94

0.00

1.18 4.00

125 Til

2A+B

20

-- 0.06 0.34 4.65 0.60 1.91 6.66

126 Til

2Blt

33

0.17 0.27 5.35 2.22 2.87 9.65

127 Til

2B2t

80

0.18 0.11 5.66 2.12 2.59 9.57

128 Til B31t 191

0.21 0.12 7.27 2.51 1.58 8.99

129 Til

4B32t 256

0.23 0.12 5.81 1.41 1.50 7.41

130 Til 5B+C 292

0.21 0.13 5.05 0.51 1.38 7.16

131 Til

SClox 375

0.19 0.14 5.35 1.21 1.26 6.91

132 Til

6IC2ox 375+

0.19 0.19 5.86 1.31 1.22 6.91

pH 1:1H2 0
6.58 5.82 6.52 6.48
6.50 6.00 7.00 6.20 6.60
6.82 6.95 6.85 6.70 6.60 6.90 7.10 6.95 7.00 7.15

133 CH1

134 CH1

135 CH1

135 CH1

137 CH1

138 139

cCHm1

140 CH2 141 CH2
142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2
145 CH2 146 CH2
147 CH2

148 CH3 149 CH3 150 CH3 151 CH3
152 CH3 153 CH3 154 CH3 155 CH3
156 CH3

157 CH4 158 CH4

Al 12 0.053 2AB 53 0.046 2B21t 88 2B22t 140
2B31 234 2B32 310 3IB33 350

Al A3 2A+B
2B21t 2B22 2B23 3B24
3IIB3

8 30 50 110 170
200 290
350+

Al A3 A+B
B2t B22t 2B23 3IIB24 4VB31 5B32

9 35 68 105 153 173 260 340 750+

2B31 750 4Clox 1000

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

0.34 0.28 0.12 0.26 0.21 0.22 0.21
0.80 0.29 0.23 0.12 0.08 0.06 0.05 0.04
2.01 0.34 0.26 0.11 0.11 0.09 0.03 0.03 0.03
0.02 0.02

0.11 0.11 0.19 0.15 0.24 0.39 0.37
1.06 1.50 1.62 1.42 1.34 0.83 0.98 1.34
0.88 1.62 0.67 0.70 1.52 1.24 1.06 0.88 1.26
1.16 1.68

0.26 0.27 0.22 0.06 0.05 0.10 0.09
0.33 0.32 0.26 0.24 0.20 0.10 0.17 0.19
0.50 0.43 0.40 0.31 0.27 0.24 0.17 0.15 0.24
0.18 0.31

1.92 2.52 2.83 4.44 5.65 6.56 5.85
2.83 1.62 1.48 2.91 4.12 5.02 7.60 6.28
10.21 4.25 3.19 4.28 5.38 6.11 6.87 6.07 6.92
2.96 3.78

0.60 0.36 0.30 0.21 0.71 2.73 2.94
0.71 0.45 0.36 0.71 1.41 2.08 3.10 3.71
1.13 1.03 0.81 0.96 1.32 2.45 3.64 3.74 4.81
3.25 4.60

4.80 5.16 9.15 8.98 6.81 7.66 6.61
5.79 7.52 8.20 11.26 11.78 11.42 12.63 12.71
4.83 4.50 5.71 9.49 10.06 10.86 11.02 11.26 12.63
6.52 3.38

6.58 7.08 11.57 12.15 11.90 15.73 15.32
7.76 7.82 8.66 11.87 12.32 14.23 16.76 18.28
11.19 7.87 8.04 11.25 12.15 14.74 15.30 15.86 21.09
10.57 10.29

4.84 4.93 4.55 4.40 4.00 3.96 4.06
4.71 4.55 4.17 4.36 4.20 4.12 4.14 4.14
5.84 5.44 5.01 4.62 4.48 4.06 4.33 4.20 4.10
3.92 4.41

PH IrlKCl

PH Saturated

5.20 __ 4.30 -4.65 4.46 --
__
~
6.44 6.9 5.99 7.1 5.51 6.8 4.96 6.5 4.61 6.4 5.21 6.6 5.03 6.5 4.90 6.4 4.88 6.5 4.96 6.5

3.66 _ 3.56 3.19 3.05 2.84 2.77 2.94 --
__ __

~ __
--
-__ ~~ *

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A39

Supplementary Table 3, Part 2. Extractive chemical analyses

[CEC, cation-exchange capacity; m, with magnetic minerals; w, without magnetic minerals. Analysts: A. L. Walker, U.S. Geological Survey, and A.J. Busacca, Peter Janitsky, and R. Meixner, University of California, Davis]

Basal

percentage of <2-mm

No. Sample Horizon depth Fe d (m) Fe d (w) ,M d (w) mags

Fe o

(cm)

Modern River Al luvi urn

1 MRAl 2 MRA2 3 MR A3 4 MRA4

AT

5 PM15 6 PM15 7 PM15 8 PM15 9 PM15 10 PM15
11 PM19 12 PM19 13 PM19 14 PM19 15 PM19 16 PM19 17 PM19 18 PM19

Al 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5ox
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4n 7C5n 8C6n

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

4 1.18 0.52 0.05 19 0.65 0.59 0.06 42 0.98 0.53 0.03
47 1.19 0.71 0.08
51 1.09 0.41 0.05 51+ 0.68 0.65 0.05

7 1.15 0.70 0.08

12 0.81 0.76 0.08

23 1.25 0.73 0.06

43 1.10 1.07 0.11

49 0.95 0.67 0.07

55 1.22 0.82 0.09

66 1.20 1.22 0.12

80+ --

0.56 0.06

0.72 0.99 0.58 0.34 1.03 0.39
0.21 0.43 0.23 0.25 0.27 0.07 0.19

0.22 0.04 0.22 0.04 0.19 0.04 0.24 0.04 0.13 0.03 0.20 0.03
0.23 0.05 0.24 0.05 0.24 0.05 0.34 0.07 0.22 0.04 0.25 0.06 0.42 0.09 0.18 0.04

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 PM8 22 PM8
23 PH13 24 PH13 25 PM13 26 PM13 27 PM13 28 PM13 29 DrMnli J1
30 PM14 31 PM14 32 PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 38 PH16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PH16 42 PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 PM18 50 PM18 51 PM18 52 PM18 53 PM18

Al 2C1 3C2 4C3
All A12 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5n
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4ox 7C5n
A Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox 5C5ox 5C6n
A 2C2ox 2C2ox 2C3ox 3C4n
A 2Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka

32 1.13 55 0.97
66 0.68 76+ 0.53

_ --

_

5 1.14 1.09 0.12 35 1.18 1.03 0.11 86 0.99 0.78 0.07 112 0.83 0.83 0.05 136
200
720

3 0.94 0.11 33 0.93 1.12 0.12 99 0.71 0.78 0.08 130 0.96 0.79 0.07 175 1.03 0.87 0.09 200 0.56 0.60 0.06 239+ 0.08 0.26 0.05

2 1.15 0.76 0.07 25 1.30 0.85 0.07
35 1.37 0.84 0.09 65 1.19 0.73 0.05 90 0.99 0.56 0.04 116 1.06 0.73 0.07
236 1.00 0.86 0.08

6 0.80 0.70 0.06 45 1.20 0.80 0.07 63 1.47 0.88 0.08
74 1.47 0.94 0.08 120+ 1.31 0.66 0.08

6 0.91 0.79 0.09 65 0.97 0.85 0.09 115 1.33 0.78 0.09 164 1.06 0.68 0.08 175 + 0.73 0.65 0.08

_
0.09 0.03 0.16 0.07
0.02 0.05 0.24 0.13 0.03 0.15 0.20
0.19 0.18 0.18 0.27 0.40 0.37 ~
0.34 0.27 0.18 0.16 0.49
0.31 0.37 0.21 0.28 0.32

__ --
0.25 0.06 0.26 0.06 0.28 0.05 0.31 0.05
0.31 0.06 0.32 0.08 0.28 0.05 0.29 0.04 0.36 0.05 0.24 0.04 0.09 0.03
0.18 0.04 0.23 0.05 0.24 0.05 0.19 0.04 0.15 0.04 0.19 0.04 0.20 0.05
0.18 0.04 0.20 0.04 0.22 0.05 0.23 0.04 0.19 0.05
0.26 0.06 0.16 0.06 0.16 0.05 0.14 0.05 0.13 0.04

54 H31 55 H31 56 H31 57 M31 58 M31
59 M46 60 M46 61 M46 62 M46 63 H46

Modesto Formatio n, upper member, 10 Ka
All 20 0.92 0.96 0.10 A12 63 0.81 0.87 0.09 AC 150 0.76 0.81 0.08 2C1 200 0.78 0.82 0.10 3C2 254 0.46 0.56 0.07 "
Allp 5 0.78 0.44 0.06 0.46 A12p 14 0.53 0.51 0.06 0.74 2A13p 32 0.96 0.54 0.06 0.52 3AC 66 0.67 0.60 0.07 0.69 4Cox 250 0.70 0.60 0.07 0.60

0.27 0.07 0.20 0.07 0.20 0.07 0.18 0.07 0.15 0.04
0.10 0.03 0.12 0.03 0.10 0.03 0.11 0.03 0.07 0.04

A40 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 3, Part 2. Extractive chemical analyses Continued

Basal

percentage of <2-mm

No. Sample Horizon depth Fe d (m) Fe d (w) Al d (w) mags

Fe o

(cm)

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka

64 Ml 2 All

15

65 Ml 2 A12

81 0.34 0.27 0.03

66 Ml 2 2B2H 102 0.44 0.34 0.05

67 M12 3B22t 170 0.49 0.45 0.06

68 Ml 2 4B3

201 0.40 0.33 0.08

69 Ml 2 5C1

231 0.42

70 Ml 2 6C2

413+

0.24 0.05 3.77

0.06 0.06 0.06 0.03
0.03

71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9 76 R9 77 R9
78 R33 79 R33 80 R33 81 R33 82 R33 83 R33 84 R33 85 R33 86 R33 87 R33

Riverbank Formati o n, upper member, 130 Ka

Allp 30 0.48 0.40 A12p 60 0.50 0.38 Bl 105 0.59 0.49 2B21 180 0.70 0.57 2B22 235 0.46 0.36 3B3 350 0.48 0.45 4C 400+ 0.42 0.34

All 4 0.46 0.37

2A12 19 1.07 0.40

3A3 39 0.87 . 0.49

3B21t 62 1.32 0.62

3B22t 83 1.38 0.71

3B23t 122

0.65

3B31 151 1.19 0.47

3B32 210 1.05 0.50

4B33 260 1.29 0.57

5Cox 300+

0.31

0.05 0.06 0.08 0.09 0.06 0.08 0.06
0.05 0.92 0.05 0.04 0.05 0.47 0.08 0.10 0.10 0.14 0.09 0.08 0.22 0.06 0.21 0.08 0.06

0.13 0.09 0.10 0.09 0.03 0.03 0.05
0.06 0.07 0.09 0.12 0.13 0.10 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.04

0.04 0.04 0.06 0.05
0.04
0.04 0.04 0.04 0.07 0.04 0.05 0.05
0.04 0.04 0.04 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.07 0.05

88 R2 89 R2 90 R2 91 R2 92 R2 93 R2
94 RIO 95 RIO 96 RlO 97 RIO 98 RlO 99 RlO
100 R32 101 R32 102 R32 103 R32 104 R32 105 R32 106 R32 107 R32

Rliverbank Formation , middle member, 250 Ka

Ap 25 B21 81 B22t 185
B3 386 Cl 500 C2n 500+

A 46 0.45 0.33 0.06 -2B1 70 0.56 0.42 0.06 2B2H 140 0.60 0.51 0.08 2B22t 210 0.57 0.43 0.08 3B3t 386 0.50 0.37 0.06 3Cox 500

All 26 0.52 0.38 0.05 1.49

A12 50 0.97 0.45 0.06 0.10

A3 70 1.07 0.46 0.06 0.21

B21t 105 1.20 0.54 0.09 0.31

B22t 150 0.70 0.60 0.09 1.36

B3H 220 1.22 0.57 0.09 0.19

2B32 354 1.25 0.40 0.07 0.39

3Cox 360+

0.40 0.07

0.06 0.04 0.07 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.04
0.07 0.03 0.06 0.03 0.07 0.04 0.09 0.05 0.09 0.05 0.09 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.07 0.05

108 R30 109 R30 110 R30 111 R30 112 R30 113 R30

Riverbank Formatiori, upper member, 330 Ka
Ap 65 0.60 0.37 0.06 BIO 78 0.84 0.59 0.09 -B21t 127 0.82 0.68 0.09 2B22t 179 0.75 0.58 0.10 3B3t 197 0.70 0.53 0.09 3Clox 220 0.64 0.51 0.08

0.12 0.03 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.07 0.05 0.06

114 T2 115 T2 116 T2 117 T2
118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6 122 T6
123 Til 124 Til 125 Til 126 Til 127 Til 128 Til 129 Til 130 Til 131 Til 132 Til

A B21 2B22 3C
All A12 2B2H 2B22t 3B+C
Allp 2A12p 2A+B 2BH 2B2t 3B3H 4B32t 5B+C 5Clox 6IC2ox

Turlock Lake Formation , 600 Ka
31 1.03 0.74 0.05 173 2.19 1.70 0.13 386 1.11 1.04 0.07 417 0.62 0.44 0.05
20 0.39 0.26 0.02 40 0.28 0.04 90 0.49 0.48 0.08 190 0.64 0.10 370 0.23 0.36 0.07
5 0.42 0.30 0.04 11 0.64 0.46 0.02 20 1.08 0.82 0.07 33 1.06 0.98 0.08 " 80 0.90 0.74 0.08 191 0.82 0.43 0.08 256 0.85 0.55 0.08 292 0.53 0.42 0.08 375 0.53 0.37 0.08 375 + 0.58 0.40 0.07

0.04 0.04 0.11 0.09 0.03 0.04 0.02 0.04
0.04 0.03 0.04 0.03 0.04 0.06 0.05 0.06 0.03 0.05
0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.04 0.06 0.03 0.06 0.03 0.06 0.03 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.03 0.05

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A41

Supplementary Table 3, Part 2. Extractive chemical analyses Continued

Basal

percentage of <2-mm

No. Sample Horizon Urn)'' Fed W Fed (w) Al d (w) mags

Fe Q

133 CH1 134 CH1 135 CH1 135 CH1 137 CH1 138 CH1 139 CH1
140 CH2 141 CH2 142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2 145 CH2 146 CH2 147 CH2
148 CH3 149 CH3 150 CH3 151 CH3 152 CH3 153 CH3 154 CH3 155 CH3 156 CH3
157 CH4 158 CH4

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

Al 12 1.41 1.42 0.13 2AB 53 1.63 1.66 0.14 2B21t 88 2.41 2.43 0.21 2B22t 140 3.31 3.33 0.22 2B31 234 3.31 3.35 0.13 2B32 310 2.06 2.27 0.13 3IB33 350 2.61 2.35 0.14 -
Al A3 2A+B 2B21t 2B22 2B23 3B24 3IIB3
Al A3 A+B B2t B22t 2B23 3IIB24 4VB31 5B32
2B31 4Clox

0.10 0.10 0.16 0.13 0.06 0.03 0.06

A1 o
0.05 0.06 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.06 0.06

Supplementary Table 4, Part 1. Mineralogy

[Percentaqes of very fine sand are based on approximately 200 qrain counts per slide of each heavy (sp gr, greater than 3,08) and medium (sp gr, 2.58-3.0"?) mineral
isolate. Etching scales, which range from 0 to 5, express average deqree of etching of all grains observed in grain counts (after Gillam and others, 1977). Analyst, J.W. Harden]

Percentages of very fine sand for selected heavy-mineral groups

No. Soil age Profile Horizon Horn- Ortho- Clino- Zircon Epidote Apatite Opaque Unknown

(Ka)

blende Pyroxene pyroxene

sphene

minerals

1 .2 PM15 Al

3.05 0.05

0.05 0.29 5.78 2.20 2.97

9.89

2 .2 PM15 IIClox 6.26 0.76 1.22 0.92 5.01 0.65 4.54 13.35

3 .2 PM15 VIC5ox 3.63 0.36 0.70 0.18 8.79 0.24 2.52 6.65

43 53

PM17 A PM17 IIC2ox

3.81 0.21 4.91 0.35

0.31 0.18 5.25 0.23 2.42 0.72 0.42 4.12 0.20 1.71

1.76 2.06

63

PM17 IIIC4n 5.41 0.86 1.85

0.30 8.98 0.05 2.11

5.14

7 10

M31 A12

5.26 0.02 0.15 0.07 9.77 0.0 1.35 6.90

8 10

M31 IIIC2

5.68 0.33 0.70

0.16 5.06 0.34 1.58

2.80

9 10

M46 A12

3.82 0.001 0.30

0.22 2.13 0.18 2.16

2.53

10 10

M46 AC

4.14 0.18 0.20

0.11 1.35 0.47 2.75

1.80

11 10

M46 IVCdx

5.06 0.17 0.46

0.18 1.67 0.10 2.19

1.63

12 40 13 130

M12 VC1 R9 IIIB3

4.62 0.08 -- --

0.05 --

0.15 1.2 -- ..

0.04 1.76 ., ..

1.94 --

14 130

R9 IVC

5.08 0.17 0.41 0.12 3.04 0.0 2.82 2.46

15 130

R33 IIA12

3.26 0.06 0.34

0.06 1.54 0.09 2.30

1.56

16 130

R33 IIIB23t 2.44 0.11 0.11 0.20 1.49 0.0 1.38 0.34

17 130

R33 VCox

6.00 0.19 0.04

0.15 1.03 0.16 7.85

1.64

18 250

RIO A

3.52 0.15 0.15 0.23 1.15 0.0 2.30 0.23

19 600

Til IIA12p 0.55 0.04 0.07 0.15 0.62 0.0 2.09 0.50

20 600 21 600

Til UB2t

0.35 0.04 0.0

0.14 0.43 0.0 4.54 0.25

Til VClox

""

--

-- "

""

Etching scales for selected heavy-mineral groups in the very fine sand fraction
Horn- Ortho- Clino- Zircon Epidote blende pyroxene pyroxene

2.2 3.0 3.0 1.3 2.5

2.1 2.0 3.9 1.0 2.9

2.9 4.0 3.5 1.7 3.0

2.6 3.6 2.5 1.6 2.8

2.5 2.9 2.8 1.0 2.5 1.8 3.0 .. 2.5

1.9 3.0 3.1 1.6 3.1

3.0 3.3 2.7 1.6 3.4

2.3 2.6 1.4 2.6

2.4 3.2 3.3 1.2 2.9

2.1 2.8 2.8 1.2 2.8

3.3 3.0 2.0 3.1

3.1 3.8 3.6 1.3 2.9

2.9 3.3 4.0 2.0 2.9

2.7 3.0 3.0 1.6 3.0

3.0 3.6 3.3 1.3 3.0

3.4 3.0

.. 1.8 3.2

2.9 3.5 3.0 1.8 3.0

3.3 4.0 3.8 1.9 3.0

3.3 4.5

.. 2.0 3.1

3.7 4.5

-- --

3.6

Sphene
_ 2.1 2.0 2.3 _ 2.4 3.7 1.8 2.3 1.6 3.1 3.3 2.7 2.6 2.5 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.4 3.3

A4Z Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 4, Part 2. Mineralogy

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

Chloritized

Mica Mica

Kaolinite Chlorite Vermiculite Vermiculite Vermiculite Mica chloritized Smectite Quartz Feldspar

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 3 MR A3 4 MRA4

-----

-----

.,
-. -

Modern River Alluvium

5 PM15 6 PM15 7 PM15 8 PM15 9 PM15 10 PM15
11 PM19 12 PM19 13 PM19 14 PM19 15 PM19 16 PM19 17 PM19 18 PM19

Al 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5ox
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4n 7C5n 8C6n

4 19 42 47 51 51+
7 12 23 43 49 55 66 80+

..
-. -_ -. --
__ ..
-. -.

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 PM8 22 PM8
23 PM13 24 PM13 25 PM13 26 PM13 27 PM13 28 PM13 29 PM13
30 PM14 31 PM14 32 PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 38 PM16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PM16 42 PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 PM18 50 PM18 51 PM18 52 PM18 53 PM18

Al 32
2C1 55
3C2 86 4C3 76+

All A12 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5n

5 35 86 112 136 200 720

All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4ox 7C5n

3 33 99 130 175
200 230+

A Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox 5C5ox 5C6n

2 25 35 65 90 116 236

A 2C2ox
2C2ox 2C3ox 3C4n

6 45
63 74 120+

A 2Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C40X

6 65 115 164 175+

+++ .. .. ++
__
--_ ..
-.
__
--. -, --
--
__ --
-. _. --
--
---. -.
_.
---
--

+

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka + ++
++

+++ +

++ X

X

X XX

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

54 M31 All

20

+++ +

--

++

-- +++

+XX

55 M31 A12

63

..

56 M31 AC

150

+++

+

+

+++

++ X

X

57 M31 2C1 200 +++ +

58 M31 3C2 254

--

++

-- +++ --

++ X

X

59 M46 60 M46 61 M46 62 M46
63 M46

Allp A12p 2Al3p SAC 4Cox

5 14 32 66
250

_. ..

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A43

Supplementary Table 4, Part 2. Mineralogy Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

64 M12 65 Ml 2 66 M12 67 Ml 2 68 Ml 2 69 Ml 2 70 M12

All A12 2B21t 3B22t 4B3 5C1 6C2

85
81
102 170 201
231 413+

Chloritized

Mica Mica

Kaolinite Chlorite Vermiculite Vermiculite Vermiculite Mica chloritized Smectite Quartz Feldspar

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka

_

+++ -- ++++

..

+++ + +++ + ++ --

++ --

+++ + +

--

_ XX X
XX
XX

71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9
76 R9 77 R9

Allp 30 A12p 60
Bl 105 2B21 180 2B22 235
3B3 350 4C 400+

78 R33 All

4

79 R33 2A12 19

80 R33 3A3

39

81 R33 3B2H 62

82 R33 3B22t 83

83 R33 3B23t 122

84 R33 3B31 151

85 R33 3B32 210

86 R33 4B33 260

87 R33 5Cox 300+

+++ _-
.. +++
+++ _
._ -_
--

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka --

++

++ + ++ + +

+

XX XX ---
XX --
X XX
---
---

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka

88 R2 89 R2 90 R2 91 R2 92 R2 93 R2

Ap 25 B21 81 B22t 185 B3 386
Cl 500 C2n 500+

--

94 RIO A

46

+++ -.

._

-- +++

+

95 RIO 2B10 70

96 RIO 2B2H 140

_

97 RIO 2B22t 210

++++

-- ++ -- +

98 RIO 3B3t 386

99 RIO 3Cox 500

100 R32 All

26

101 R32 A12

50

102 R32 A3

70

103 R32 B21t 105

104 R32 B22t 150

105 R32 B31t 220

106 R32 2B32 354

107 R32 3Cox 360+

_ --
---

--
-----
xX ---
XX
--
--
-----
"~

108 R30 Ap

65

109 R30 BIO

78

110 R30 B21t 127

111 R30 2B22t 179

112 R30 3B3t 197

113 R30 3Clox 220

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka

+ +++ --

-- -- ++

_ +++ ++ +

++ + ++ --

XXX --
--
XX --
X"

Turlock Lake Formation, 600 Ka

114 T2 A

31

+++

115 T2 B21 173

116 T2 2B22 386 ++++ +

117 T2 3C

417

+++

+

++
+ ++ ++ + +

118 T6 119 T6
120 T6 121 T6 122 T6

All A12
2B21t 2B22t 3B+C

20 40
90 190 370

.. ---

123 Til Allp

5

__

124 Til 2A12p 11 +++ +

++ ++ +

125 Til 2A+B 20

126 Til 2Blt 127 Til 2B2t

33 80

_ ++++ -_

++ ++ +

128 Til 3B31t 191

129 Til 4B32t 256 130 Til 5B+C 292

_.

131 Til 5Clox 375

132 Til 6C2ox 375+

++++

--

--

++

-- ++ --

XX X --
XX XX
--
--
--
+XX --
XX
--
-XX

A44 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 4, Part Z. Mineralogy Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

133 CH1 Al

12

134 CH1 2AB

53

135 CH1 2B21t ftft

136 CH1 2B22t HO

137 CH1 2B31 234

138 CH1 2B32 310

139 CH1 3B33 350

140 CH2 Al

8

141 CH2 A3 142 CH2 2A+B

30 50

143 CH2 2B21t 110

144 CH2 2B22 170

145 CH2 2823 200

146 CH2 3B24 290

147 CH2 383 350

148 CH3 Al

9

149 CH3 A3

35

150 CHS A+B

68

151 CHS B2t 105

152 CHS B22t 153

153 CHS 2B23 173

154 CHS 3824 260

155 CH3 4B31 340

156 CHS 5B32 750+

157 CH4 2B31 750 158 CH4 4Clox 1000

Chloritized

Mica Mica

Kaolinite Chlorite Vermiculite Vermiculite Vermiculite Mica chloritized Smectite Quartz Feldspar

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka
++++ + + ..
-- -- ~-
++++ + -_ + ._
++++
--
..

+ XX
++ X ++++ X

X
X X

..

-_ .. ._ _.
_ ~"

Trace Moderate amount present Large amount present
Dominant

Supplementary Table 5. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 pm) fraction by X-ray fluorescence

[All analyses in weight percent. Analysts: J. Baker, A. Bartel, 0. Carr, D. Hopping, V.G. Mossotti, 0. Taggart, and J.S. Wahlberg]

Basal No. Sample Horizon Depth Si02
(cm)

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 3 MRA3 4 MRA4

60.4 61.4 58.6 58.7

A1 20 3 Fe20 3 MgO CaO Na20 K20 Ti02 P 205 MnO

Modern River Alluvium
14.3 7.83 2.1 2.49 1.6 14.6 6.59 2.1 2.47 1.7 14.3 7.31 1.9 2.33 2.2 16.0 6.54 2.4 2.30 1.4

1.82 0 .86 0.3 1.86 0 .77 0.2 1.86 0 .74 0.3 1.41 0 .77 0.3

0.14 0.16 0.38 0.24

Zr0 2

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A45

Supplementary Table 5. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 ym) fraction by X-ray fluorescenceContinued

Basal No. Sample Horizon Depth Si02 A1 203 Fe2 03 MgO CaO Na20 K2 0 Ti02 P 20 5 MnO
(cm)

Zr0 2

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

5 PM15 Al

4 67.30 12.82 5.53 1.72 3.31 2.07 1.74 0.86 0.17 0.123 0.104

6 PM15 2Clox 19 66.69 13.11 5.88 1.80 3.14 1.99 1.72 0.88 0.17 0.109 0.1

7 3C2ox 42

4C3ox 47

9

J V/"U A

51

10 PM15 6C5ox 51+ 65.37 13.39 6.29 1.85 3.13 1.95 1.76 0.89 0.18 0.154 0.1

11 PM19

7

12 PM19 2A12 12 61.82 13.63 6.05 1.80 2.63 1.75 2.14 0.77 0.28 0.119 0.04

13

PM19

3Clox

L. sJ

14 PM19 4C2ox 43 63.50 14.45 6.45 1.95 2.47 1.84 2.20 0.79 0.20 0.124 0.036

15 PM19

49

16 PM19 6C4n 55

17 PM19 7C5n 66

18 PM19 8C6n 80+ 63.56 14.28 6.34 1.82 2.51 1.62 2.02 0.77 0.15 0.112 0.03

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka

19 PM8 Al

32 62.20 14.65 6.17 1.82 2.52 1.67 2.08 0.77 0.27 0.124 0.033

20 PM8 2C1 55 64.65 14.24 6.26 2.15 2.81 1.42 1.79 0.81 0.12 0.104 0.037

21 PM8

66

22 PM8 4C3 76+ 65.41 13.31 6.05 2.03 3.05 1.45 1.77 0.88 0.15 0.120 0.081

23 PM13

5

24 35fli tPM13 2Clox oc

PM13 3C2ox 112

27 4C3ox 1 QC

OQ HM 1 O

200

29 6C5n 720

30 PM14

3

31 PM14 2A12 33 61.35 14.40 6.43 1.96 2.68 1.65 2.00 0.78 0.16 0.125 0.031

32 PM14 3Clox 99 65.32 13.52 5.80 1.82 2.85 2.03 1.80 0.80 0.14 0.107 0.053

33 PM14 4C2ox 130

PM14 5C3ox 175

35 PM14 6C4ox 200 66.90 13.47 5.68 1.72 2.92 1.86 1.75 0.82 0.15 0.107 0.072

36 PM14 7C5n 230+

37 PM16 n

2

DM1 C Clox

25

PM16 2C2ox *J+s

40 DM1 C 3C3ox 65

41 PM16 "U"U A 90

42

PM16

116fc/Vi J\J A

PM16 5C6n ooc

44 PM17

6

45 PM17 2C2ox 45

46 PM17 2C2ox 63

47 PM17 2C3ox 74

48 PM17 3C4n 120+

49 PM18 A

6 53.14 11.67 6.16 2.06 3.38 1.47 2.18 0.79 0.29 0.137 0.039

50 PM18 2Clox 65 66.02 13.08 6.31 1.88 2.82 1.52 1.75 0.87 0.16 0.112 0.055

51 PM18 2C2ox 115

52 PM18 3C3ox 164

53 PM18 4C4ox 175+ 64.84 13.55 6.30 1.93 2.81 1.66 1.83 0.85 0.17 0.109 0.053

A46 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 5. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 pm) fraction by X-ray fluorescenceContinued

Basal No. Sample Horizon Depth Si0 2 A1 2 0 3 Fe 2 0 3 MgO CaO Na2 0 K 2 0 Ti0 2 P 2 0 5 MnO
(cm)

ZrO;

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

54 M31 All 20 62.55 14.01 6.04 1.85 2.79 1.72 2.13 0.77 0.25 0.12 .037
55 M31 A12 63
56 M31 AC 150 57 M31 2C1 200 64.39 14.74 6.24 1.89 2.42 2.02 2.11 0.81 0.18 0.103 0.045 58 M31 3C2 254 65.80 14.06 5.87 1.90 2.70 2.04 2.05 0.85 0.17 0.099 0.062

59 M46 Allp 5 57.8 14.6 6.09 2.00 2.60 2.05 2.51 0.75 0.28 0.09 0.0317 60 M46 A12p 14 63.32 14.66 5.21 1.61 2.86 2.56 2.62 0.73 0.20 0.097 0.042
61 M46 2A13p 32 60.5 15.6 6.29 2.02 2.65 2.21 2.63 0.79 0.26 0.13 0.0350
62 M46 3AC 66 63.43 15.93 5.90 1.56 2.68 2.12 2.61 0.79 0.19 0.118 0.04 63 M46 4Cox 250 64.12 14.93 5.57 1.73 2.83 2.37 2.43 0.76 0.17 0.100 0.04

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka
64 M12 All 15 57.10 15.80 7.78 1.90 1.32 1.30 1.38 0.76 0.10 0.13 65 M12 A12 81 65.13 15.74 4.77 1.17 2.90 2.95 2.57 0.80 0.14 0.098 0.053 66 M12 2B21t 102 67 M12 3B22t 170 56.31 19.81 6.74 1.52 2.37 2.12 1.88 0.80 0.14 0.097 0.037 68 M12 4B3 201 69 M12 5C1 231 63.38 15.99 5.32 1.51 3.17 2.59 2.17 0.81 0.13 0.092 0.055 70 M12 6C2 413+ 59.30 16.20 7.66 1.70 1.48 1.40 1.23 0.81 0.10 0.13

Riverbank Formation , upper member , 130 Ka

71 R9 Allp 30 65.80 16.31 4.46 0.84 2.30 2.64 2.43 0.84 0.11 0.134 0.046 72 R9 A12p 60 61.9 17.1 4.92 1.11 2.11 2.33 2.39 0.80 0.12 0.16 0.0346 73 R9 Bl 105 59.1 19.5 5.65 1.21 1.76 2.06 2.35 0.85 0.14 0.13 0.0335 74 R9 2B21 180 54.0 22.9 6.16 1.22 1.38 1.57 1.78 0.81 0.14 0.14 0.0265
75 R9 2B22 235 56.59 22.48 6.19 1.02 1.42 1.58 1.93 0.86 0.13 0.115 0.028 76 R9 3B3 350 55.8 20.0 6.82 1.96 1.77 1.63 2.32 0.83 0.12 0.1 0.0213 77 R9 4C 400+ 57.71 18.94 6.51 1.88 2.79 1.97 2.19 1.08 0.18 0.092 0.044

78 R33 All

4 63.30 15.69 4.33 1.00 2.27 2.66 2.53 0.81 0.15 0.163 0.05

79 R33 2A12 19

80 R33 3A3 39

81 R33 3B21t 62

82 R33 3B22t 83

83 R33 3B23t 122 55.53 21.22 6.28 0.87 1.31 1.55 1.96 0.87 0.16 0.092 0.029

84 R33 3B31 151

85 R33 3B32 210

86 R33 4B33 260

87 R33 5Cox 300+ 51.30 20.60 7.70 1.63 1.90 1.05 1.68 0.85 0.23 0.078 0.035

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A47

Supplementary Table 5. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 ym) fraction by X-ray fluorescenceContinued

Basal No. Sample Horizon Depth Si02 A1 2 0 3 Fe2 0 3 MgO CaO Na2 0 K 20 Ti02 P 2°5 MnO
(cm)

Zr0 2

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka

88 R2 Ap

25 65.01 15.57 4.08 0.74 2.85 3.12 2.55 0.79 0.13 0.108 0.069

89 R2 B21 81 6.10 18.3 5.20 1.18 1.96 2.30 2.62 0.84 0.16 0.12 0.0416

90 R2 B22t 185 58.45 21.30 6.29 1.06 1.51 1.68 2.28 0.86 0.20 0.123 0.032

91 R2 B3 386 52.4 22.2 7.24 1.85 1.64 1.54 2.01 0.83 0.16 0.11 0.0263

92 R2 Cl 500 49.4 21.7 9.13 2.81 1.65 1.36 2.34 0.93 0.19 0.16 0.0240

93 R2 C2n 500+ 55.01 18.30 6.04 1.59 2.77 2.04 2.70 0.69 0.30 0.186 0.047

94 RIO A

46 65.98 15.93 4.36 1.04 2.36 2.75 2.66 0.83 0.12 0.085 0.062

95 RIO 2B10 70 59.5 19.3 5.58 1.12 1.76 2.13 2.42 0.84 0.15 0.11 0.0396

96 RIO 2B21t 140 60.07 18.92 5.65 0.85 1.84 2.04 2.11 0.87 0.12 0.093 0.04

97 RIO 2B22t 210 55.6 21.6 6.18 1.33 1.68 1.79 1.78 1.78 0.13 0.10 0.0297

98 RIO 3B3t 386 55.99 19.61 6.45 1.32 2.14 2.03 1.96 0.85 0.13 0.073 0.038

99 RIO 3Cox 500

100 R32 All 26 64.32 15.95 4.54 0.98 2.50 2.73 2.61 0.84 0.13 0.102 0.05

101 R32 A12 50

102 R32 A3

70

103 R32 B21t 105

104 R32 B22t 150 58.02 20.29 6.03 0.95 1.66 1.95 2.19 0.85 0.15 0.088 0.035

105 R32 B31t 220

106 R32 2B32 354

107 R32 3Cox 360+ 54.45 18.84 8.08 1.70 2.35 1.59 2.17 1.01 0.15 0.051 0.051

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka

108 R30 Ap

65 65.88 16.27 4.45 0.99 2.19 2.71 2.74 0.86 0.08 0.072 0.062

109 R30 BIO 78

110 R30 B21t 127 53.87 21.75 6.86 0.89 1.39 1.60 1.89 0.96 0.11 0.077 0.03

111 R30 2B22t 179

112 R30 3B3t 197

113 R30 3Clox 220 49.05 20.93 8.98 1.18 1.32 0.77 1.41 0.95 0.14 0.070 0.014

Turlock Lake Formation, 600 Ka

114 T2 A

31 69.07 14.20 4.70 0.38 0.82 1.56 3.02 1.02 0.10 0.151 0.067

115 T2 B21 173 53.89 22.40 7.01 0.32 0.27 0.61 2.03 1.01 0.12 0.037 0.035

116 T2 2B22 386 57.72 21.52 6.23 0.77 1.66 1.95 1.70 0.89 0.09 0.049 0.055

117 T2 3C 417 61.93 18.10 6.41 0.90 1.38 1.59 1.96 0.89 0.10 0.055 0.051

118 T6 All 20 61.17 16.75 5.07 1.36 2.77 2.92 2.51 0.90 0.15 0.173 0.062
119 T6 A12 40 56.5 18.1 7.00 1.70 2.29 2.18 2.75 1.04 0.16 0.15 0.0402
120 T6 2B21t 90 47.7 23.0 8.80 2.08 1.17 0.37 1.64 0.90 0.11 0.06 0.0150 121 T6 2B22t 190 47.61 23.06 8.83 1.12 1.14 0.86 1.84 1.08 0.13 0.080 0.02 122 T6 3B+C 370 54.45 18.60 7.50 2.15 4.35 2.37 1.95 1.16 0.11 0.280 0.061

123 Til Allp 5 124 Til 2Al2p 11 56.62 15.59 4.20 0.47 1.64 2.47 3.04 0.81 0.12 0.079 0.051 125 Til 2A+B 20 126 Til 2Blt 33 56.35 20.88 6.13 0.49 0.88 1.33 2.29 0.92 0.12 0.043 0.035 127 Til 2B2t 80 128 Til 3B31t 191 129 Til 4B32t 256
130 Til 5B+C 292
131 Til BClox 375 132 Til 6C2ox 375+ 50.32 21.19 8.35 0.90 1.32 0.88 1.51 0.87 0.17 0.038 0.019

A48 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 5. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 in) fraction by X-ray fluorescenceContinued

Basal
No. Sample Horizon depth Si02 A1 203 Fe203 MgO CaO r,2o K20 Ti02 MnO P2°5 Zr02
(cm)

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

133 CH1 Al

12 73.93 12.55 4.52 0.29 0.41 1.17 2.17 0.94 0.11 0.058 0.067

134 run ?AR 53

135 CH1 2B2H 88 62.50 20.57 6.81 0.36 0.28 0.99 1.55 0.99 0.15 0.080 0.044 136 pun 9D9 94. 140

137

rul

9DT1

234

1 "3O

run

9DT9

310

139 CH1 3B33 350 53.54 23.81 10.34 0.47 0.17 0.51 1.25 0.92 0.15 0.024 0.024

140 CH2 Al

8 71.8 12.5 4.94 0.61 0.18 0.5 2.11 0.98 0.1 0.05 _

141 CH2 A3

30 64.2 16.4 6.54 0.65 0.12 0.46 1.83 1.02 0.17 0.03 0.0513

142 CH2 2A+B 50 61.2 18.5 7.18 0.68 0.08 0.41 1.68 1.05 0.18 0.03 0.0470

143 CH2 2B2H 110 53.1 23.6 8.56 0.55 0.05 0.28 1.03 1.02 0.20 0.08 0.0350

144 CH2 2B22 170 49.5 25.6 10.0 0.49 0.07 0.22 0.41 0.93 0.14 0.02 0.0261

145 CH2 2B23 200 51.3 25.3 8.58 0.55 0.07 0.2 0.66 0.86 0.1 0.02

146 CH2 3B24 290 48.7 24.5 11.3 0.75 0.11 0.21 0.57 0.98 0.1 0.02 0.0192

147 CH2 3B3 350 48.6 25.2 10.4 0.80 0.1 0.2 0.55 0.83 0.1 0.02 --

148 CH3 Al 149 run A3

9 69.8 13.2 4.95 0.61 0.38 0.7 2.17 1.00 0.1 0.1 35

__

150 A+B CO

151 run D94- 105

152

D99H-

153

153 CH3 2B23 173 48.0 27.2 8.31 0.55 0.12 0.2 0.58 0.84 0.1 0.02 __ 154 run 3B24 ?fifl

155 run 4B31 340

156 CH3 5B32 750+ 49.3 23.9 9.91 0.98 0.11 0.2 0.66 0.87 0.1 0.02 --

157 CH4 2B31 750 52.3 24.6 8.09 0.98 0.05 0.4 1.32 0.70 0.1 0.02 __ 158 CH4 4Clox 1000 50.9 26.4 6.24 1.1 0.11 0.4 1.16 0.71 0.1 0.02 --

Supplementary Table 6. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by X-ray fluorescence

[All analyses in weight percent. Analysts: J. Baker, A. Bartel, J. Lindsay, V.G. Mossotti, S. Ramage, B. Scott, J.Taggart, J.S. Wahlberg, and K. Wong]
Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Si02 A1 2 03 Fe 20 3 MgO CaO Na20 K20 Ti02 MnO P 2 0 5 Zr02
(cm)

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 3 MRA3 4 MRA4

Modern River Alluvium

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A49

Supplementary Table 6. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by X-ray fluorescence Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth SiO, A1 20 3 Fe2 03 MgO CaO Na2 0 K2 0 Ti02 MnO P2 05 Zr02
(cm)

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

5 PM15 6 PM15 7 PM15 8 PM15 9 PM15 10 PM15
11 PM19 12 PM19 13 PM19 14 PM19 15 PM19 16 PM19 17 PM19 18 PM19

Al 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5ox
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4n 7C5n 8C6n

4 70.65 12.85 4.32 1.37 3.21 2.47 2.30 0.58 0.082 0.09 0.035 19 68.52 13.33 5.14 1.59 3.43 2.63 2.09 0.71 0.107 0.11 0.028 42 ._ 47 .. 51 51+ 70.16 13.67 4.29 1.49 3.33 2.58 2.27 0.57 0.090 0.09 0.033
7 12 .. 23 ._ 43 .. 49 ._ 55 .. 66 .. 80+

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 PM8 22 PM8
23 PM13 24 PM13 25 PM13 26 PM13 27 PM13 28 PM13 29 PM13
30 PM14 31 PM14 32 PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 38 PM16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PM16 42 PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 PM18 50 PM18 51 PM18 52 PM18 53 PM18

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka

Al 32 61.32 14.41 5.91 2.01 2.87 1.88 2.13 0.71 0.139 0.19 0.033

2C1 55 64.48 14.38 5.60 2.00 3.09 2.20 1.98 0.71 0.114 0.09 0.035

3C2 66

..

4C3 76+ 70.27 13.45 3.52 1.27 2.91 2.82 2.46 0.42 0.080 0.04 0.017

All A12 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox
5C4ox 6C5n

5 35 86 112 136 200 720

.. .. .. .. .. .. --

All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4ox 7C5n
A Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox 5C5ox 5C6n

3 33 99 130 175 200 239+
2 25 35 65 90 116 236

.. .. .. .. ._ --
._ .. .. .. .. .. --

A 2C2ox
2C2ox 2C3ox 3C4n

6 45
63 74 120+

.. ._ .. --

A 2Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox

6 65
115
164 175+

.. .. ..

A50 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 6. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mrn fraction by X-ray fluorescenceContinued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Si02 Al 20-j ^2^3 MgO CaO Na2 0 K2 0 Ti02 MnO P 2°5 Zr02
(cm)

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

54 M31
56 n/m 57 M31 58 M31
59 M46 60 M46 61 M46 62 M46 63 M46

All Ar\.1L 2t.
r\V*
2C1 3C2
Allp A12p 2A13p 3AC 4Cox

20 63 150 200 254
5 14 32 66 250

65.56 14.00 5.23 1.69 3.10 2.21 2.32 0.66 0.108 0.19 0.029
66.81 14.14 5.00 1.64 3.16 2.69 2.26 0.65 0.094 0.12 0.036 70.10 13.57 4.09 1.45 3.20 2.86 2.38 0.57 0.077 0.09 0.033
66.3 13.4 3.21 0.98 2.72 2.68 2.72 0.41 0.04 0.14 0.0185 68.5 14.0 3.5L 1.07 2.75 2.69 2.83 0.46 0.05 0.14 0.0199 69.6 14.0 3.45 0.99 2.75 2.63 2.84 0.45 0.06 0.12 0.0186 68.2 14.4 4.00 1.25 2.73 2.49 2.81 0.50 0.07 0.13 0.0195 68.2 14.4 4.01 1.26 2.82 2.46 2.68 0.49 0.07 0.12 0.0211

64 Ml O 65 M12 66 Ml O 67 M12
CO Ml O
69 M12 70 Ml O

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka

15

A12 81 70.91 13.86 2.79 0.48 2.57 2.98 2.96 0.38 0.080 0.03 0.020

ODO1 <-

102

3B22t 170 67.69 16.00 4.08 0.77 2.65 2.77 2.51 0.44 0.080 0.04 0.021

/I DQ 201

5C1 231 69.58 14.96 3.22 0.66 3.02 3.39 2.69 0.36 0.080 0.03 0.017 cr*o 413+

71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9 76 R9 77 R9
78 R33 79 DTO
on ROO 01 DOT oo poo
83 R33
B/l poo
OC ROT
Q£ poo
87 R33

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka

Allp 30 71.71 13.43 3.14 0.38 2.19 2.95 2.50 0.45 0.080 0.01 0.023 A12p 60 72.7 13.3 2.80 0.55 2.10 2.96 2.42 0.40 0.060 0.05 0.0199 Bl 105 71.7 14.0 3.12 0.60 1.98 2.97 2.25 0.44 0.050 0.06 0.0171 2B21 180 68.9 15.4 3.45 0.61 1.75 2.77 1.86 0.44 0.060 0.06 0.0167
2B22 235 68.96 15.45 3.67 0.45 1.78 2.75 1.91 0.48 0.082 0.02 0.019 3B3 350 67.5 16.0 3.20 0.94 2.53 2.67 2.71 0.41 0.040 0.05 0.0136 4C 400+ 64.74 16.52 3.82 1.25 3.58 2.63 3.04 0.52 0.080 0.06 0.017

All 4 71.2 13.1 2.73 0.53 2.04 3.00 2.35 0.41 0.05 0.07 0.0227

?A1? "3A"}

19 39

TD91 +

CO

ODOO4-

QT

3B23t 122 68.0 15.9 3.57 0.65 1.53 2.83 1.90 0.43 0.07 0.08 0.0172

TDOI

151

TDTO

210

4B33 ocn

5Cox 300+ 72.3 14.0 2.43 0.53 2.33 3.06 2.68 0.25 0.02 0.06 0.0082

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A51

Supplementary Table 6. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mai fraction by X-ray fluorescenceContinued

Basal
No. Sample Horizon depth Si02 A1 20 3 Fe2°3 MgO CaO Na2 0 K2 0 Ti02 MnO P2 o5 Zr02
(cm)

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka

88 R2 89 R2 90 R2
91 R2 92 R2 93 R2

Ap 25 74.39 12.36 2.61 0.40 2.13 3.14 2.26 0.38 0.08 0.02 0.025 B21 81 72.6 13.3 3.03 0.52 1.92 3.21 2.37 0.45 0.05 0.06 0.0193 B22t 185 69.68 14.86 4.09 0.42 1.69 3.03 1.94 0.52 0.08 0.04 0.022
B3 386 69.0 15.2 3.41 0.68 2.31 2.78 2.67 0.38 0.03 0.05 0.0132 Cl 500 72.0 14.3 2.02 0.54 2.34 3.28 3.21 0.25 0.02 0.05 0.0104 C2n 500+ 72.89 14.76 1.29 0.31 2.20 4.01 3.23 0.16 0.08 0.02 0.008

94 RIO 95 RIO
96 RIO 97 RIO 98 RIO 99 RIO

A 2B1 2B21t 2B22t 3B3t 3Cox

46 70 140 210 386 500

74.77 12.68 2.68 0.31 1.81 3.27 2.34 0.41 0.067 0.06 0.025 72.2 13.5 2.91 0.51 1.68 3.23 1.85 0.43 0.04 0.05 0.0201
71.48 14.29 3.42 0.43 1.74 3.09 2.29 0.45 0.066 0.06 0.020 71.4 14.1 3.05 0.55 1.82 2.99 2.28 0.38 0.04 0.05 0.0167 70.09 15.04 3.53 0.68 2.37 2.74 2.74 0.41 0.04 0.05 0.018

100 R32 101 R32 102 R32 103 R32 104 R32 105 R32 106 R32
107 R32

All 26 72.4 13.5 3.39 0.59 2.21 3.01 2.52 0.47 0.05 0.05 0.0251
A12 50 A3 70 B21t 105 B22t 150 68.6 15.0 4.15 0.66 1.87 2.84 2.18 0.50 0.06 0.07 0.0234
B31t 220 2B32 354 3Cox 360+ 68.0 15.4 3.87 0.81 3.10 2.61 3.09 0.41 0.04 0.05 0.0136

108 R30 109 R30 110 R30 111 R30 112 R30 113 R30

Ap BIO B21t 2B22t 3B3t 3Clox

65 78 127 179 197 220

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka 74.69 12.38 3.58 0.29 1.68 3.29 2.23 0.44 0.06 0.04 0.031 69.43 15.11 4.55 0.41 1.55 2.89 2.00 0.52 0.051 0.05 0.023
67.94 14.71 4.63 0.58 2.31 2.85 2.37 0.54 0.043 0.05 0.014

114 T2 115 T2 116 T2 117 T2
118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6 122 T6
123 Til 124 Til 125 Til 126 Til 127 Til 128 Til 129 Til 130 Til 131 Til 132 Til

A B21 2B22 3C
All A12 2B2H 2B22t 3B+C
Allp 2A12p 2A+B 2Blt 2B2t 3B31t 4B32t 58+C 5Clox 6IC2ox

31 173 386 417
20 40 90 190 370
5 11 20 33 80 191 256 292 375 375+

Turlock Lake Formation , 600 Ka 77.66 10.18 3.18 0.02 0.64 3.70 1.03 0.48 0.08 0.02 0.040 66.96 16.26 5.17 0.08 0.23 3.02 0.51 0.44 0.028 0.08 0.028 66.39 16.29 4.13 0.33 2.01 2.30 2.42 0.50 0.08 0.01 0.035 72.03 13.64 3.08 0.27 1.72 3.24 2.67 0.34 0.08 0.01 0.016 74.1 12.6 2.35 0.46 2.10 3.17 2.48 0.31 0.03 0.05 0.0166 73.4 12.9 2.72 0.53 2.14 3.18 2.47 0.36 0.04 0.05 0.0199 69.4 14.4 3.57 0.77 2.11 2.68 2.11 0.39 0.03 0.05 0.0104 66.9 16.0 3.85 0.80 1.70 2.90 1.91 0.42 0.04 0.05 0.0103 74.8 12.7 1.64 0.57 2.07 3.20 2.51 0.22 0.03 0.05 0.0095
74.8 12.2 2.38 0.27 1.30 3.59 2.13 0.35 0.03 0.05 0.0224 69.2 15.2 3.46 0.42 0.90 3.30 1.60 0.46 0.02 0.06 0.0194
70.5 14.2 3.52 0.53 1.97 2.69 2.53 0.35 0.02 0.06 0.0112

A5Z Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 6. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-Z-mm fraction by X-ray fluorescence Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

133 CH1 134 rui 135 CH1 135 fUll 137 rui
1 OQ rui
139 CH1
140 CH2 141 CH2 142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2 145 CH2 146 CH2 147 CH2
148 CHS 149 run 150 r un 151 run
ico run
153 CHS 154 run 155 CH3 156 run
157 CM 158 CH4

Al
?AR
2B21t
00994-
9D'31
9B"59
3IB33

12 53 88 140
310 350

Al A3 2A+B
2B21t 2B22 2B23 2B24 3IIB3

8 30
50
110
170 200
290 350

Al
A? A+B
D94-
D991-
2B23 3IIB24 4VB31
r n QO

9
oc
68 105 153 173
9£ A
340 750+

ORO1

750

4Clox 1000

Si02 A1 203 Fe2()3 MgO CaO Na2 0 K20 Ti02 MnO
China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation , 3,000 Ka 78.82 10.02 3.92 0.10 0.34 0.56 1.75 0.74 0.04 66.93 16.75 6.06 0.17 0.26 0.47 1.35 0.84 0.08
64.39 17.11 7.59 0.23 0.20 0.06 1.36 0.67 0.08 77.8 8.89 3.80 0.41 0.15 0.39 1.62 0.74 0.02 74.4 11.4 4.76 0.44 0.10 0.37 1.52 0.77 0.02 70.4 13.6 5.45 0.49 0.07 0.33 1.48 0.82 0.07 60.8 19.3 7.13 0.46 0.04 0.21 0.99 0.87 0.02 56.7 21.4 8.77 0.40 0.05 0.17 0.36 0.79 58.6 19.8 8.80 0.46 0.07 0.15 0.55 0.75 0.02 57.0 19.5 9.46 0.60 0.08 0.17 0.66 0.85 0.02 59.0 18.5 9.25 0.64 0.09 0.16 0.76 0.82 0.02 75.4 8.88 3.61 0.43 0.34 0.47 1.62 0.71 0.09
60.6 19.9 6.62 0.44 0.08 0.15 0.65 0.72 0.02 65.3 16.0 6.53 0.59 0.08 0.19 1.14 0.57 0.02
--

P2o5 Zr02
0.1 0.049 0.08 0.040
0.05 0.020 0.12 0.0436 0.13 0.0394 0.16 0.0448 0.12 0.0319
0.0208 0.08 0.0221 0.08 0.0178 0.09 0.0155 0.09 0.0436
0.09 0.0199 0.06 0.0167

Supplementary Table 7, Part 1. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 yrn) fraction by instrumental neutron activation

[Fe and K values in weight percent; all others in parts per million. Analysts: J. Budahn, R. Knight, and D. McKown]

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Ba Ce Co Cr Cs Dy Eu Fe Gd Hf K La Lu Mn
(cm)

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 3 MR A3 4 MRA4

-- 916 -- 970 - 1180 -- 1040

Modern River Alluvium
54.6 16.5 104 4.32 4.90 1. 15 5.41 4.2 16.0 1.65 32.0 0.462 1090 51.5 16.3 96.7 4.47 4.72 1. 10 4.53 4.12 6.76 1.68 29.7 0.391 1250 52.7 18.8 90.7 4.55 4.36 1. 10 5.09 3.97 7.35 1.61 30.3 0.350 2780 64.5 18.9 67.0 4.84 4.51 1. 30 4.57 5.42 5.84 1.22 39.3 0.345 1850

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A53

Supplementary Table 7, Part 1. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 urn) fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

Ba

5 PM15 Al

4 824

6 PM15 2Clox 19 891

7 PM15 3C2ox 42

8 PM15 4C3ox 47

9 PM15 5C4ox 51

10 PM15 6C5ox 51+ 908

11 PM19 All

7

12 PM19 2A12 12 952

13 PMls 3Clox 23

14 PM19 4C2ox 43 908

15 PM19 5C3ox 49

16 PM19 6C4n 55

17 PM19 7C5n 66

18 PM19 58C6n 80+ 926

Ce Co Cr Cs Dy Eu Fe Gd Hf K La Lu Mn
Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka 59.9 16.7 99.2 4.01 4.56 1.13 4.37 4.61 14.1 1.66 31.5 0.453 1040 63.5 19.3 110 4.62 5.22 1.23 4.92 5.3 12.1 1.56 32.9 0.458 1080
63.2 21.3 106 4.54 5.11 1.23 4.93 5.34 12.3 1.74 33.7 0.462 1510 50.8 16.0 98.0 4.98 -- 1.02 4.67 3.92 6.02 2.06 26.9 0.369 979 55.8 16.6 93.0 3.82 4.40 1.08 4.18 4.69 7.01 1.79 27.8 0.399 907
55.1 16.7 94.6 4.18 4.55 1.11 4.30 4.42 5.15 1.77 29.3 0.368 880

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 PM8 22 PM8.
23 PM13 24 PM13 25 PM13 26 PM13 27 PM13 28 PM13 29 PM13
30 PM14 31 PM14 32 PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 38 PM16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PM16 42 PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 PM18 50 PM18 51 PM18 52 PM18 53 PM18

Al 32 1080 2C1 55 1010
3C2 66 4C3 76+ 1110

All A12 2Clox 3C2ox
4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5n

5 35 86 112
136 200 720

All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4ox 7C5n

3 33 99 130 175 200 230+

991 972
939

A Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox 5C5ox 5C6n

2 25 35
65 90 116 236

A 2C2ox 2C2ox 2C3ox 3C4n

6 45
63
74 120+

A 6 936 2Clox 65 982
2C2ox 115
3C3ox 164 4C4ox 175+ 1190

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka

55.0 15.9 115 60.5 15.0 108

4.15 4.78 1.05 3.88 -3.68 4.43 1.12 3.75 6.2

6.43 1.81 30.2 0.459 896 7.24 1.44 31.1 0.475 753

64.2 14.9 119 3.44 4.89 1.13 3.75 -- 17.8 1.33 31.0 0.572 856

54.5 17.9 98.3 4.74 4.25 1.08 4.66 4.02 4.84 1.83 28.7 0.377 1010 65.0 18.9 102 4.75 4.72 1.15 4.84 4.93 8.26 1.56 32.2 0.398 1010
67.2 20.4 107 4.70 5.27 1.25 5.07 5.18 10.6 1.62 34.0 0.414 1130

43.4 16.4 94.3 4.53 -- 0.912 4.40 3.67 6.16 2.05 23.5 0.336 1100 54.0 17.3 105 4.11 5.33 1.18 4.63 5.15 8.42 1.51 30.1 0.411 989
57.3 20.5 122 5.23 5.24 1.19 5.56 5.36 8.47 1.71 30.2 0.461 1010

54 M31 55 M31 56 M31 57 M31 58 M31
59 M46 60 M46 61 M46 62 M46 63 M46

All A12 AC 2C1 3C2
Allp A12p 2A13p 3AC 4Cox

20 63 150 200 254
5 14 32 66 250

1050
986 1010
1160 982 958

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka 53.4 18.1 99.2 4.90 4.73 1.14 4.66 4.44 5.33 2.04 29.1 0.388 1070
52.8 16.0 92.6 4.66 4.23 1.01 4.47 3.58 5.99 1.75 27.1 0.346 845 56.5 17.4 98.6 5.14 4.36 1.02 4.63 4.48 8.19 1.85 27.6 0.351 904
75.5 21.6 109 6.54 4.62 1.31 5.58 6.38 7.83 2.06 38.7 0.491 1010 63.8 16.1 70.6 5.34 4.03 1.07 4.30 4.72 7.08 2.11 30.5 0.356 1040 62.9 16.0 72.0 5.19 4.14 0.999 4.25 4.83 6.46 2.12 28.5 0.325 990

A54 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 7, Part 1. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 ym) fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

Ba

64 M12 65 Ml 2 66 M12 67 M12 68 M12 69 M12 70 M12

All 85 A12 81 821
2B21t 102 3B22t 170 741
4B3 201 5C1 231 681 6C2 413+ 1680

Ce
69.0 89.9 74.3 129

Co Cr Cs Dy Eu Fe Gd Hf K La

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka

10.6 73.8 4.17 4.38 1.24 3.23 5 .39 11.7 2.07 35.1

14.7 84.5 4.85 5.52 1.36 4.70 - -

8.20 1.50 49.0

11.5 58.6 3.72 4.98 1.12 3.57

11.9 1.69 36.1

31.1 47.0 9.43 5.83 1.24 5.80 0 .00 8.54 2.17 61.2

Lu Mn

0.374
0.372
0.345 0.420

673
671
617 1930

71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9 76 R9 77 R9
78 R33 79 R33 80 R33 81 R33 82 R33 83 R33 84 R33 85 R33 86 R33 87 R33

Allp 30 928 A12p 60 Bl 105 2B21 180 2B22 235 660 3B3 350 4C 400+ 971
All 4 1070 2A12 19 3A3 39 3B2H 62 3B22t 83 3B23t 122 618 3B31 151 3B32 210 4B33 260 5Cox 300+ 665

69.1
85.3 110 73.4
83.0
167

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka 13.2 86.3 4.00 4.51 1.28 3.00 5 .06

9.69 2.08 35.5

15.0 88.6 4.90 4.37 1.38 4.19 5 .31 6.25 1.54 43.7

15.1 46.6 6.38 6.26 1.65 4.70

10.0 1.84 52.3

13.6 81.7 5.21 3.95 1.29 3.66 4 .95 9.49 2.12 38.6

13.6 67.8 5.43 4.59 1.50 4.57 5 .51 5.06 1.68 47.8 14.0 55.2 6.31 5.50 1.54 6.07 8 .18 2.60 1.24 85.0

0.390 888

0.349 0.466 0.437

823 659 1110

0.316 813 0.352 758

88 R2 89 R2 90 R2 91 R2 92 R2 93 R2
94 RIO 95 RIO 96 RIO 97 RIO 98 RIO 99 RIO
100 R32 101 R32 102 R32 103 R32 104 R32 105 R32 106 R32 107 R32

Riverbank Formation, middle member , 250 Ka

Ap 25 827 B21 81 B22t 185 746 B3 386 Cl 500 C2n 500+

64.2 10.3 77.0 3.10 4.23 1.24 2.80 5 .32 15.6 1.99 31.9 0.409 716 80.5 15.6 97.1 5.46 5.15 1.37 4.31 6 .38 6.80 1.90 42.2 0.357 880

A 2B1 2B21t 2B22t 3B3t
3Cox

46 70 140 210 386 500

812 64.9 9.73 68.4 4.58 4.31 1.16 3.15 5 .37 6.98 2.34 33.2 0.344 786

691 82.7 12.9 87.7 6.11 4.24 1.43 4.69 6 .82 6.15 1.77 50.3 0.427 680

590 107

13.1 57.0 6.21 4.32 1.27 4.87 6 .25 4.38 1.54 62.6 0.362 689

All 26 843 63.7 10.1 65.8 4.33 4.01 1.09 3.04 4 .81 7.88 2.20 34.3 0.359 831

A12 50

A3 70

B21t 105

B22t 150 649 77.6 12.4 71.5 4.94 4.36 1.27 4.11 4 .73 6.32 2.07 42.2 0.322 809

B31t 220

2B32 354

3Cox 360+ 624 149

18.3 61.9 7.16 4.79 1.34 6.37 5 .90 3.99 1.74 76.1 0.372 845

108 R30 109 R30 110 R30
111 R30 112 R30
113 R30

Ap BIO B21t 2B22t 3B3t 3Clox

65 78 127 179 197 220

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka 863 77.0 11.7 72.1 5.80 4.51 1.33 3.74 5 .33 8.58 2.52 40.0 0.375 667 503 95.1 14.5 59.4 5.72 3.82 1.19 4.51 5 .03 4.65 1.56 43.5 0.291 725

404 112

12.4 56.8 6.09 6.10 1.46 6.26 7 .58 2.34 1.08 73.5 0.479 534

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A55

Supplementary Table 7, Part 1. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 ym) fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

Ba

114 T2 115 T2 116 T2 117 T2
118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6 122 T6
123 Til 124 Til 125 Til 126 Til
Til 128 Til 129 Til 130 Til 131 Til 132 Til

A 31 1080 B21 173 2B22 386 697 3C 417 667

All A12
2B21t 2B22t 3B+C

20 40
90 190 370

1020
474 707

Allp 2A12p
2A+B 2Blt 2B2t 3B31t 4B32t
5B+C 5Clox 6C2ox

5 11
20 33 80 191
256 292 375 375+

964 625
333

Ce Co Cr Cs Dy Eu Fe Gd Hf K La Lu Mn

77.2
124 114
110

Turlock Lake Formation., 600 Ka

18.4 114 4.28 4.45 1.09 3.00 5.52 13.1

13.2 60.2 3.33 6.92 1.73 4.11 12.6 74.5 4.58 7.69 2.17 4.26

12.6 10.9

19.7 74.8 5.15 5.63 1.63 4.62 7.58 10.2

2.72 33.0
1.57 52.6 1.80 57.5
2.33 57.1

0.447
0.571 0.556
0.521

1070
363 416
975

76.9 12.5 66.6 6.28 5.57 1.40 6.17 6.46 2.87 1.45 55.9 0.380 569 193 30.1 56.2 6.04 6.77 2.09 7.07 10.5 6.36 1.43 90.2 0.642 2230

78.1 16.1 70.6 5.13 4.01 1.14 3.32 4.64 10.4 2.52 38.0 0.387 641 65.5 12.9 67.5 6.04 2.97 0.904 4.52 4.31 6.81 1.70 30.2 0.288 368

152 12.8 68.2 5.86 6.69 1.62 6.90 9.80 2.61 1.09 91.0 0.529 360

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

133 CHl 134 CHl 135 CHl 136 CHl 137 CHl 138 CHl 139 CHl
140 CH2 141 CH2 142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2 145 CH2 146 CH2 147 CH2
148 CHS 149 CHS 150 CHS 151 CHS 152 CHS 153 CH3 154 CH3 155 CHS 156 CHS
157 CH4 158 CH4

Al 12 828 58.3 8.04 114 4.08 4.45 1.03 2.77 6.05 13.2 1.75 28.3 0.469 401

2AB 53 2B21t 88 644 76.1 15.8 111 4.43 3.47 1.00 4.28 --

8.85 1.30 31.1 0.408 597

2B22t 140

2831 234

2832 310

3833 350 749 32

8.19 122 2.77 2.86 0.735 6.71

3.88 1.10 21.1 0.364 168

Al 8 755 44.5 6.99 103 4.66 3.40 0.637 3.24 3.37 9.54 1.86 23.8 0.330 449 A3 30 2A+B 50
2B21t 110 2B22 170 2B23 200 540 26.1 5.25 77.8 2.88 2.56 0.506 5.40 2.40 4.03 0.560 17.4 0.272 192 3B24 290 3B3 350 383 37.8 8.80 84.2 2.58 3.90 0.962 6.51 4.58 2.52 0.50 26.1 0.295 215

Al 9 926 48.6 9.27 99.1 4.86 3.72 0.756 2.98 3.71 8.72 1.80 27.3 0.337 776 A3 35 A+B 68 B2t 105
B22t 153
2823 173 339 25.8 6.25 90.0 4.46 2.24 0.514 5.47 0.00 3.09 0.523 17.9 0.236 152
3B24 260
4B31 340 5832 750+ 522 58.9 9.67 101 2.63 4.22 1.31 6.27 5.3 2.49 0.530 33.9 0.341 187

2B31 750 4Clox 1000

656 641 114

8.61 70.9 3.48 5.02 1.41 5.32 5.95 3.31 1.12 32.1 10.422 170 10.9 57.2 4.23 7.84 2.31 4.64 8.43 3.42 0.987 39.4 0.671 163

A56 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 7, Part 2. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 ym) fraction by instrumental neutron activation

[Na values in weight percent; all others in parts per million. Analysts: J. Budahn, R. Knight, and D. McKown]

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Na Nd Rb Sb Sc Sm Sr Ta Tb Th Tm
(cm)

U Yb Zr

Modern River Alluvium

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 -3 MRA3 4 MRA4

1.24 29.2 81.1 1.07 18.0 5.63 168 0.947 0.760 15.5 0.520 12.8 2.99 582 1.18 26.1 76.8 1.01 17.9 5.37 178 0.830 0.745 12.4 0.430 10.6 2.57 225 -- 1.60 29.4 81.5 1.04 16.5 5.48 206 0.813 0.692 13.4 0.390 16.4 2.48 230 0.981 38.2 58.9 0.931 15.3 6.45 160 0.881 0.730 16.4 0.400 7.35 2.33 194

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

5 PM15 Al

4 1.15 27.1 69.8 0.915 17.5 5.49 195 0.970 0.735 13.6 0.460 8.82 2.83 479

6 PM15 2Clox 19 1.18 28.6 79.3 1.11 19.1 5.89 190 1.01 0.768 14.2

9.56 3.01 418

7 PM15 3C2ox 42

8 PM15 4C3ox 47

9 PM15 5C4ox 51

10 PM15 6C5ox 51+ 1.10 27.2 79.3 1.08 18.8 5.91 189 0.989 0.799 14.5

11.1 3.02 420

11 PM19 All

7

12 PM19 2A12 12 1.10 21.7 116 0.926 17.8 4.76 152 0.873 0.616 11.4

6.39 2.39 222

13 PM19 3Clox 23

14 PM19 4C2ox 43 1.22 23.3 77.8 1.14 17.9 5.02 182 0.868 0.686 10.5

5.66 2.48 254

15 PM19 5C3ox 49

16 PM19 6C4n 55

17 PM19 7C5n 66

18 PM19 8C6n 80+ 1.18 24.5 75.5 1.01 17.9 5.02 167 0.847 0.707 10.9 0.420 6.47 2.55 165

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka

19 PM8 Al 20 PM8 2C1 21 PM8 3C2 22 PM8 4C3

32 1.24 28.5 90.6 1.04 17.2 4.66 224 0.825 0.776 12.8 0.487 6.34 2.41 174 55 1.22 27.7 73.8 0.939 15.1 4.93 223 0.880 0.788 12.8 0.409 6.91 2.58 206
86 76+ 1.19 29.9 71.0 1.01 15.6 4.97 264 1.03 0.815 15.3 0.441 11.1 2.49 518

23 PM13 All

5

24 PM13 A12 35

25 PM13 2Clox 86

26 PM13 3C2ox 112

27 PM13 4C3ox 136

28 PM13 5C4ox 200

29 PM13 6C5n 720

30 PM14 All

3

31 PM14 2A12 33 1.08 26.1 92.3 0.986 18.4 5.04 180 0.822 0.658 11.3

5.60 2.43 165

32 PM14 3Clox 99 1.19 29.9 82.5 0.939 19.0 5.36 173 1.00 0.765 13.3

11.0 2.64 290

33 PM14 4C2ox 130

34 PM14 5C3ox 175

35 PM14 6C4ox 200 1.22 34.1 83.2 1.02 19.5 5.40 190 0.986 0.814 15.3 0.440 12.1 2.82 359

36 PM14 7C5n 230+

37 PM16 A

2

38 PM16 Clox 25

39 PM16 2C2ox 35

40 PM16 3C3ox 65

41 PM16 4C4ox 90

42 PM16 5C5ox 116

43 PM16 5C6n 236

44 PM17 A

6

45 PM17 2C2ox 45

46 PM17 2C2ox 63

47 PM17 2C3ox 74

48 PM17 3C4n 120+

49 PM18 A

6 0.872 23.0 95.7 1.06 16.6 4.40 178 0.816 0.568 9.15 0.36 6.10 2.20 226

50 PM18 2Clox 65 1.03 27.7 75.6 1.05 19.3 5.56 152 0.901 0.834 10.9 0.41 6.25 2.77 287

51 PM18 2C2ox 115

52 PM18 3C3ox 164

53 PM18 4C4ox 175+ 1.05 28.3 87.5 1.09 21.8 5.63 146 0.976 0.848 11.5 0.470 6.66 2.78 292

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A57

Supplementary Table 7, Part 2. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 pm) fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Na Nd Rb Sb Sc Sm Sr Ta Tb Th Tm
(cm)

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

54 M31 All 20 55 M31 A12 63 56 M31 AC 150 57 M31 2C1 200 58 M31 3C2 254

1.12 26.0 96.5 0.917 18.3 5.19 202 0.915 0.679 11.1 0.390

1.59 26.4 87.5 0.854 17.2 4.67 158 0.864 0.672 11.4 0.35

1.49 24.2 99.1 0.900 17.0 4.75 180 1.02

12.5 0.370

59 M46 Allp 5 60 M46 A12p 14 61 M46 2A13p 32 62 M46 3AC 66 63 M46 4Cox 250

1.34 33.3 118 1.38 21.0 6.15 223 1.14
1.48 24.7 109 1.01 14.4 4.86 204 1.01 1.49 26.0 95.0 0.989 14.2 4.62 207 1.01

0.828 17.5 0.500
0.653 15.5 0.360 0.646 15.5 0.360

U Yb Zr

5.24 2.47 174

3.77 2.22 4.51 2.27
7.80 3.03
5.98 2.25 5.36 2.17

200 277
235 287 259 222 219

Modesto Formation, upper member, 40 Ka

64 M12 All 85

160

65 M12 A12 81 2.07 29.3 106 1.01 11.3 5.05 332 1.17 0.669 17.3 0.351 6.42 2.50 308

66 M12 2B21t 102

67 Ml 2 3B22t 170 1.40 35.8 86.6 0.867 14.7 5.77 212 0.938 0.741 22.8 0.405 6.57 2.55 205

68 M12 4B3 201

69 M12 5C1 231 1.84 27.2 78.4 0.703 11.5 5.05 293 1.01 0.661 20.1 0.331 6.46 2.27 312

70 M12 6C2 413+ 1.54 41.9 142 1.07 13.5 7.81 278 1.14 0.867 51.6 0.450 9.77 2.75 318

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka

71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9 76 R9 77 R9

Allp 30 A12p 60 81 105 2B21 180
2822 235 3B3 350 4C 400+

1.85 28.0 115 1.00 10.9 5.21 279 1.08
1.15 34.8 103 1.02 14.3 5.95 182 1.01 1.40 40.6 89.5 1.10 14.9 7.52 253 1.22

0.691 13.4 0.349
0.673 17.5 0.370 0.873 32.5 0.491

5.08 2.41
5.44 2.27 6.69 3.18

267 256 248 196 159 158 271

78 R33 All

4 1.66 30.3 131 1.15 12.7 5.62 274 1.25 0.679 15.1 0.460 5.38 2.69 310

79 R33 2A12 19

80 R33 3A3 39

81 R33 3B21t 62

82 R33 3B22t 83

83 R33 3B23t 122 0.937 40.5 97.1 0.968 15.1 6.76 143 1.00 0.709 18.0 0.330 5.77 2.23 170

84 R33 3831 151

85 R33 3B32 210

86 R33 4B33 260

87 R33 5Cox 300+ 0.320 55.1 88.0 0.892 17.5 8.98 110 0.843 0.924 38.7 0.410 11.9 2.63 51

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka

88 R2 89 R2
90 R2 91 R2 92 R2 93 R2

Ap 25 821 81
B22t 185 B3 386 Cl 500 C2n 500+

2.16 26.2 103 1.22 29.8 107

1.14 9.11 4.92 340 1.21 1.12 14.1 5.63 156 1.09

0.610 16.0 0.727 18.8 0.401

5.28 2.46 6.45 2.40

425 308 157 195 177

94 RIO A

46

95 RIO 2B10 70

96 RIO 2B21t 140

97 RIO 2B22t 210

98 RIO 3B3t 386

99 RIO 3Cox 500

1.86 30.6 121 1.17 38.0 105 1.17 38.7 102

1.04 10.7 5.02 242 1.13 0.649 14.5 0.370 1.04 16.0 6.66 169 1.16 0.762 19.2 0.974 15.3 6.59 176 0.964 0.716 25.6 0.360

5.17 2.18 6.10 2.67 6.52 2.28

221 293 223 220 143

100 R32 All 26 1.86 26.1 107 1.03 10.7 4.93 265 1.09 0.626 14.0 0.350 5.00 2.26 274

101 R32 A12 50

102 R32 A3

70

103 R32 B21t 105

104 R32 B22t 150 1.37 35.6 98.4 1.01 13.6 5.84 188 1.03 0.736 18.9 0.390 5.82 2.20 238

105 R32 B31t 220

106 R32 2B32 354

107 R32 3Cox 360+ 0.532 49.1 114 0.891 18.3 7.76 118 1.03 0.882 36.6 0.430 10.1 2.52 112

A58 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 7, Part 2. Total chemical analyses of the fine (less than 47 pin) fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth
(cm)

108 R30 Ap

65

109 R30 BIO 78

110 R30 B21t 127

111 R30 2B22t 179

112 R30 3B3t 197

113 R30 3Clox 220

Na Nd Rb Sb Sc Sm Sr

Ta Tb

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka

1.78 35.0 134 1.13 11.8 5.93 246 1.03 36.1 87.4 0.980 14.8 6.23 144

1.41 0.811 1.30 0.618

0.261 47.3 75.5 1.02 18.8 8.29 100 1.02 0.995

Th Tm
18.8 0.360 23.5 32.8 0.500

U Yb Zr
6.34 2.55 278 6.05 2.00 157 6.98 2.94 110

Turlock Lake Formation, 600 Ka

114 T2 115 T2 116 T2 117 T2

A 31 B21 173 2822 386 3C 417

1.05 29.5 129. 0.959 9.36 4.79 169
1.63 45.0 74.1 1.03 15.0 8.21 254 1.30 57.1 96.2 1.19 12.6 9.92 210

118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6 122 T6

All A12 2B21t 2B22t 3B+C

20 40 90 190 370

1.78 43.0 126
0.233 42.2 104 0.826 64.5 113

0.93 14.4 7.43 301
0.940 21.0 7.42 100 1.06 24.1 10.4 199

123 Til Allp 5 124 Til 2A12p 11 1.60 25.7 131 1.14 9.70 5.19 246 125 Til 2A+B 20
126 Til 2Blt 33 0.786 25.4 96.8 1.23 13.8 4.58 115 127 Til 2B2t 80 128 Til 3B31t 191 129 Til 4B32t 256 130 Til 5B+C 292 131 Til SClox 375
132 Til 6C2ox 375+ 0.216 61.8 79.4 0.881 21.9 10.1 103

1.37 0.703 15.8 0.353
1.58 1.08 26.1 0.563 1.17 1.30 26.2 0.487
1.37 0.925 20.0 0.510
1.13 0.822 27.1 0.470 1.24 1.22 41.6 0.630

5.25 2.45 6.05 3.79 5.64 3.34
5.54 3.33
5.45 2.64 8.64 4.21

414
362 334
355 298 111 110 249

1.31 0.628 17.4 0.420 1.31 0.495 20.8 0.271

5.12 2.44 360 5.30 1.89 235

1.20 1.07 36.0 0.483 6.47 3.22 110

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

133 cm
134 CHl 135 CHl 136 CHl 137 CHl
138 CHl
139 CHl

Al 2AB 2B21t 2B22t 2B31 2B32 3B33

12 53 88 140 234 310 350

0.702 25.7 98.5 0.942 9.46 4.38 0.524 29.0 73.0 1.16 13.7 4.17

97.9 1.01 0.718 13.5 0.396 79.1 1.16 0.665 15.8 0.410

5.22 2.54 412 5.48 2.33 270

0.0733 15.9 53.0 1.46 24.6 2.89 45 0.608 0.571 14.0 0.345 6.36 2.10 174

140 CH2 141 CH2 142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2 145 CH2 146 CH2 147 CH2

Al A3 2A+B
2B2H 2B22 2B23 3B24 3B3

8 30 50
110 170 200 290 350

0.373 18.9 99.8 0.937 10.3 3.55 100 1.11 0.480 11.8 0.340
0.0335 11.8 35.1 1.06 21.2 2.44 100 0.901 0.454 8.97 0.270 0.0580 24.7 33.9 1.34 27.9 5.13 0.00 0.693 0.603 11.9 0.000

4.73 2.03
3.13 1.65 3.76 1.85

293 380 348 254
193 127 142
100

148 CH3 Al

9 0.447 20.9 98.3 0.907 11.1 4.23 100 1.14 0.535 12.5 0.360 4.78 2.22 269

149 CHS A3

35

150 CH3 A+B 68

151 CHS B2t 105

152 CH3 B22t 153

153 CHS 2B23 173 0.0333 14.5 34.9 1.06 19.2 2.59 0.00 1.06 0.313 10.9 0.200 4.29 1.35 77.9

154 CH3 3B24 260

155 CHS 4B31 340

156 CHS 5B32 750+ 0.0557 38.5 31.7 1.25 25.9 7.29 0.00 0.609 0.705 9.78 0.334 5.58 2.22 140

157 CH4 2B31 750 0.106 31.8 56.5 1.27 29.4 6.67 100 158 CH4 4Clox 1000 0.153 42.9 55.1 1.13 29.2 9.68 100

0.778 0.872 12.1 0.51 1.09 1.32 17.4 0.81

6.84 2.74 107 7.19 4.40 191

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A59

Supplementary Table 8, Part 1. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by instrumental neutron activation

LNa values in weight percent; all others in parts per million. Analysts: J. Baker, A. Bartel, D. Burgi, R. Johnson, R. Knight, H.T. Millard, V.G. Mossotti, S. Ramage, B. Scott, J. Taggart, O.S. Wahlberg, and K. Wong]

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Ba Ce Co Cr Cs Dy Eu Fe Gd Hf K
(cm)
Modern River Alluvium
1 MRA1
2 MRA2
3 MR A3
4 MRA4

La Lu

Mn

5 PM15 6 PM15 7 PM15
PM15 9 PM15 10 PM15
11 PM19 12 PM19 13 PM19 14 PM19 15 PH19 16 PM19 17 DMl Q 1 Q PM19

Al
2C10X
3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5ox
3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4n 7C5n 8C6n

4 19 42 47 51 51+
7 12 23
49 55 66
Qfl4.

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 22 PM8
23 PM13 24 PM13 25 PM13
DMl "3
27 PM13 9B PM13 29 PM13
30 PM14 31 PM14
PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 TP PM16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PM16
PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 DM1 Q 50 51 52 DMl Q 53 DMl Q

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka

Al 32 899 49.4 17.9 110 4.02 4.32 1.12 4.12 5.78 5.82 1.77 25.7 0.328 875

2C1 55 932 51.6 16.4 114 3.80 4.23 1.11 3.91 4.56 6.76 1.53 26.2 0.349 766

66

4C3 76+ 839 32.7 9.40 58.8 2.70 2.32 0.770 2.34

3.12 2.01 17.4 0.184 480

2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox
5C4ox 6C5n

5 35
Q£
112 136 200 720

3Clox 4C2ox
5C3ox 6C4ox 7C5n

3
99 130 175 200 239+

Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox
5C5ox 5C6n
2C2ox

2 25 35 65 90 116 236
6 45 63 74 120+

2Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox

6
65 115
164 175+

A60 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 8, Part 1. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal
No. Sample Horizon depth Ba Ce Co Cr Cs Dy Eu Fe Sd Hf K (cm)

Modesto Formation, upper member, 10 Ka

54 55 56 M31 57
DO
59 M46 60 M46 61 M46
63 M46

rtU
Allp A12p 2A13p 4Cox

20
150 200 254
5 14
66 250

La Lu

Mn

64 nl c 65 Ml 2 66 67 Ml 2
69 Ml 2 70
71 R9 72 DO 73 DO, 74 DQ 75 R9 76 DQ 77 R9
70 D-J-J
79 D77 ori R33
01 D77 QO D77 QO D77
84 D7T
Qr D77 QC D77 Q7 noq

Modesto Formation, lower member, 40 Ka

A12
£Dc It
3B22t
5C1

81 902 102 170 738
231 870 413+

49.7 55.6 43.2

5.12 19.9 2.65 2.73 0.855 1.96 2.43 4.04 2.43 25.1 0.189 344

4.66 30.1 2.57 2.63 0.651 2.63

3.51 1.98 29.3 0.199 347

5.64 18.3 2.45 2.54 0.859 2.24 4.02 3.13 2.17 22.0 0.179 311

Allp A12p
01
?R?1
2B22
OnO
4C
3 A3
ORO 1 * OROO-f ODOOf OD'Jl
DROO
4B33 5Cox

30 971 60 105 i ftn
235 840 350 400+ 875

39.8
49.4 43.6

4 19 39 __ _ fi?
go
122 151 2io ocn
300+

Riverbank Formation, upper member, 130 Ka 6.16 36.2 2.38 2.45 0.829 2.07 2.95 4.36 2.47 20.0 0.208 461

8.69 41.3 2.88 2.5 0.903 2.49 3.1 8.81 18.9 3.31 2.56 0.906 2.65

3.64 2.33 23.6 0.221 523 2.71 2.25 21.8 0.197 466

__ _

._

88 R2 89 07 90 R2 91 D9 92 DO 93 R2
94 ci n 95 Din 96 RIO 97 nl n 98 pin 99 nl n
100 019 101 R1? 102 D19 103 D19 104 PI? 105 D19 106 D19 107 D19

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka

Ap 25 917 34.0 3.88 18.0 1.86 3.45 0.756 1.70 DO! 81

4.84 2.54 16.9 0.189 289

B22t 185 914 53.1 8.09 37.8 2.97 2.86 0.897 2.69 3.41 4.31 2.41 25.4 0.256 467
DO *5QC

Cl 500 C2n 500+ 1210 18.5 2.63 3.64 3.67 0.982 0.448 0.843

1.26 3.54 11.5 0.066 167

A
OQl
OD91 f ODOO* ODq-h
3Cox

46 70 140 01 r*
OQC
500

All
A3
R9H-
DOO-IDO1 4ODQO

?fi
50
70 105 150 220 354 360+

________

_

1 no Din 109 R30 110 Din 111 Din 112 Din 113 Din

An Di n
DO1 4-
opoo*.
ORO4-
3Clox

65
7Q
127 179 197 220

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A61

Supplementary Table 8, Part 1. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Ba Ce Co Cr Cs Dy Eu Fe Sd Hf K
(cm)

La Lu

Mn

Turlock Lake Formation, 600 Ka

114 T2 115 T2 116 T2 117 T2

A 31 1210 42.4 10.0 85.6 2.82 1.96 0.543 2.20 2.56 7.31 3.15 16.9 0.178 605 821 173
2B22 386 739 67.1 8.72 36.0 2.35 4.22 1.25 2.85 3.2 6.75 1.89 33.1 0.339 236 3C 417 989 31.4 4.33 25.6 2.45 2.48 0.959 2.08 3.03 2.73 2.57 19.9 0.182 210

118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6 122 T6

All A12 2B21t
2B22t 3B+C

20 40 90
190 370

..

123 Til 124 Til 125 Til 126 Til 127 Til 128 Til 129 Til 130 Til 131 Til 132 Til

Allp 2A12p 2A+B
2Blt 2B2t 3B31t 4B32t 5B+C
5Clox 6IC2ox

5 11 20
33 80 191
256 292 375 375+

_ __

133 CH1 134 CH1 135 CH1 136 CH1 137 CH1 138 CH1 139 CH1
140 CH2 141 CH2 142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2 145 CH2 146 CH2 147 CH2
148 CHS 149 CHS 150 CHS 151 CHS 152 CHS 153 CHS 154 CHS 155 CHS 156 CHS
157 CH4 158 CH4

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3000 Ka

Al 12 666 50.6 7.73 112 2AB 53 2B21t 88 549 64.4 18.4 107 2B22t 140 2B31 234
2B32 310 3IB33 350 615 24.5 7.54 120

Al A3 2A+B
2B21t 2B22 2B23 3B24 31 IBS

8 30
50
no
170
200
290 350+

Al A3 A+B
B2t B22t 2B23
3IIB24 4VB31 5B32

9 35 68 105 153 173 260 340 750+

2B31 750 4Clox 1000

3.10 3.18 0.770 2.63 3.5 9.36 1.39 22.3 0.332 342 3.77 3.50 0.854 4.17 3.59 8.06 1.14 26.4 0.306 603 2.48 2.37 0.623 5.40 3.94 3.08 1.14 18.6 0.270 127
~

A6Z Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 8, Part 2. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by instrumental neutron activation

[Na values in weight percent; all others in parts per million. Analysts: J. Baker, A. Bartel, D. Burgi, R. Johnson, R. Knight, H.T. Millard, V.G. Mossotti, S. Ramage, B. Scott, J. Taggart, J.S. Wahlberg, and K. Wong]

Basal

No. Sample Horizon depth Na Nd Rb

Sb

Sc Sm

Sr Ta

Tb

Th

Tm

(cm)

1 MRA1 2 MRA2 3 MR A3 4 MRA4

-----

Modern River Alluvium .. -- -.. .. -- --

Yb Zr

5 PM15 6 PM15 7 PM15 8 PM15 9 PM15 10 PM15
11 PM19 12 PM19 13 PM19 14 PM19 15 PM19 16 PM19 17 PM19 18 PM19

Al 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox 5C4ox 6C5ox
All 2A12 3Clox 4C2ox 5C3ox 6C4n 7C5n 8C6n

4 19 .-
42 47 51 -51+ ..
7 -12 -23 -43 -49 .. 55 .66 -80+

Post-Modesto Deposits, .2 Ka

-- .- ..

.. ..

.. ..

-. -- .. .. -. ..
-- -- .. -- -- .. -- -- --- -- .. -. .. .. -. -- .. -- -- --

.. -. .. ..
-- .. .. .. -- -.. .. .. .. .. .. -- --

-. ... -.
.. .. _- .. -- -.. .. .. ... .. -- --

19 PM8 20 PM8 21 PM8 22 PM8
23 PM13 24 PM13 25 PM13 26 PM13 27 PM13 28 PM13 29 PM13
30 PM14 31 PM14 32 PM14 33 PM14 34 PM14 35 PM14 36 PM14
37 PM16 38 PM16 39 PM16 40 PM16 41 PM16 42 PM16 43 PM16
44 PM17 45 PM17 46 PM17 47 PM17 48 PM17
49 PM18 50 PM18 51 PM18 52 PM18 53 PM18

Post-Modesto Deposits, 3 Ka

Al 32 1.35 23.6 93.6 0.995 16.9 4.76 227 0.864 0.628 10.3 0.362 6.03 2.31 167

2C1 55 1.58 22.9 87.1 0.903 16.1 4.92 258 0.911 0.535 11.2 0.429 5.77 2.15 223

3C2

66 --

-- -- --

-- --

-- --

4C3 76+ 1.96 14.2 80.7 0.526 0.890 2.96 302 0.611 0.335 6.75 -- 3.85 1.26 89.2

All A12 2Clox 3C2ox 4C3ox
5C4ox 6C5n

5 35
86 112 136 200 720

~ --
-----

.. -- .. -. -- ..
-- -- --- .-
-- -- -- -- --

.. .. .. ..
-- --- --- --- --

.. .. ..
.. --- --- --- --

All 3 .. 2A12 33 .. 3Clox 99 .. 4C2ox 130 -5C3ox 175 -6C4ox 200 -7C5n 239+ --

.. -- .. -- - .. .. .. .. -- -- -.. .. .. -- -- --- -- --

.. .. .. .. .. -- -.. .. -- --- --

.. .-. .. .. .. -- -.. .. -- --- --

A Clox 2C2ox 3C3ox 4C4ox 5C5ox 5C6n

2 25 35 65 90 116 236

-. .. ----

-- -- -.. .. .. -- -- --- -- - --- -- --

-- -.. .. -- --- --- --

-- -.. .-- --
-- --- --

A 6 -2C2ox 45 -. 2C2ox 63 -2C3ox 74 .. 3C4n 120+

-- -.. .. ..
-- -- -.. ..

- -.. ..
.- -.. ..

-- -..
-- -. .. ..

A 2Clox 2C2ox

6 65
115

---
..

3C3ox 164

4C4ox 175+ --

-- -- -. -- -- -.. .. ..
.. .- ..

-- -- -.. ..
-. ..

-- .-- --
..
.. .-

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California

A63

Supplementary Table 8, Part 2. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-2-mm fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal

No. Sample Horizon depth Na Nd Rb

Sb

Sc Sm

Sr Ta

Tb

Th

Tm

U

Yb Zr

(cm)

54 M31 55 M31 56 M31 57 M31 58 M31
59 M46 60 M46 61 M46 62 M46 63 M46

All A12 AC 2C1 3C2
Allp A12p 2A13p 3AC 4Cox

20 63 150 200 254
5 14 32 66 250

Modesto Formation,, upper member, 10 Ka

.. .. .. .. .. ..

.. -- -- -- -- ..

.. -- -- -- -- ..

-- -- -. -- .- ..

-- --

-- -- --

-- ..

.. ..

-- -- -- -- -- --

-- -- -- -- -- --

-- -- -- -- -- ..

.. -- --

- --

.. .. -. -. --
.. --..

.. -----
.. ----

64 Ml 2 65 Ml 2 66 Ml 2 67 M12 68 Ml 2 69 M12 70 M12
71 R9 72 R9 73 R9 74 R9 75 R9 76 R9 77 R9
78 R33 79 R33 80 R33 81 R33 82 R33 83 R33 84 R33 85 R33 86 R33 87 R33

All A12 2B21t 3B22t 4B3 5C1 6C2

15 81
102 170
201 231 413+

2.31 1.98 2.40

..
21.2 --
24.0 --
19.2 ..

Modesto Formation , lower member, 40 Ka

95.4 82.5 85.6

..
0.695 -.
0.448 --
0.494 --

.. 4.89 -7.29
5.21 --

...
3.77 --
4.14 --
3.03 --

..
370 --
313 .-
421 --

..
0.895 ..
0.778 ..
0.726 --

0.373 0.436 0.318

..
9.81 ..
13.6 ..
11.1 --

0.20 0.271 -

3.20 3.95 3.11

1.42 1.37 1.15

..
120 --
132 --
88.1 -

Allp A12p Bl 2B21 2B22 3B3 4C
All 2A12 3A3 3B21t 3B22t 3B23t 3B31 3B32 4B33 5Cox

30 60 105 180 235 350 400+
4 19 39 62 83 122 151 210 260 300+

Riverbank Formation , upper member, 130 Ka

1.94 18.8 96.4

1.60 2.38

22.8 20.0

93.5 83.0

_.

0.491
_ 0.534 0.614 __

5.41
.. 7.06 7.86 _

3.46 __ 3.92 3.49 __

300 ..
254 418
__

0.817
0.862 0.570 ..

0.321
0.380 0.369

--

..
-.. _. .. .. _. .-
--

12.0 .. 9.42
11.3 _.
_.

0.170

3.18
2.84 2.47

1.20
1.25 1.25

132 148 127 124 1H 101 863
168 --
127
51

88 R2 89 R2 90 R2 91 R2 92 R2 93 R2
94 RIO 95 RIO 96 RIO 97 RIO 98 RIO 99 RIO
100 R32 101 R32 102 R32 103 R32 104 R32 105 R32 106 R32 107 R32

Ap B21 B22t B3 Cl C2n
A 2B1 2B21t 2B22t 3B3t 3Cox
All A12 A3 B21t B22t B31t 2832 3Cox

25 81 185 386 500 500+
46 70 140 210 386 500
26 50 70 105 150 220 354 360+

1.87 1.43
2.60

Riverbank Formation, middle member, 250 Ka

18.8 __ 23.9

39.4 99.8

_. 7.20 136

0.533 _
0.674 ._ _.
0.829

3.58 _. 6.80
.. 1.63

3.09 ._ 4.32
1.21

308 _.
253
451

0.819 __ 0.929
._ 0.271

0.332 0.397
0.098

__ .. __ __ -.
-_

--

-- --

-- --

.. __ __

_ __

.. ..

--

-_ _ _ _. ..

-. -__ _.
-- ~ --

.. .. --

8.85 .. 11.2 5.22 __
-_ _. _.

0.192 --

2.61 3.84
1.66

1.23 1.71
0.421

158 143 134
98 77 53
_ 149
124

186

173
-101

108 R30 109 R30 110 R30 111 R30 112 R30 113 R30

Ap BIO B21t
2B22t 3B2c 3Clox

65 78 127 179 197 220

Riverbank Formation, lower member, 330 Ka
__ ._ _. _ _ ._ -- .. _. _- -- _-

-- --

-- -- ~-

-~

---
~~

A64 Soil Chronosequences in the Western United States

Supplementary Table 8, Part 2. Total chemical analyses of the less-than-Z-mm fraction by instrumental neutron activation Continued

Basal No. Sample Horizon depth Na Nd Rb
(era)

114 T2 115 T2 116 T2 117 T2
118 T6 119 T6 120 T6 121 T6 122 T6
123 Til 124 Til 125 Til 126 Til 127 Til 128 Til 129 Til 130 Til 131 Til 132 Til

A B21 2B22 3C

31 173 386 417

All A12 2B21t
2B22t 3B+C

20 40 90 190 370

Allp 2A12p 2A+B
2Blt 2B2t 3B31t 4B32t 5B+C
5Clox 6IC2ox

5 11 20 33 80 191 256 292 375 375+

0.812 _.
1.94 1.97

13.3
30.8 22.0

124
79 109

_

_ _.

--

Sb

Sc Sm

Sr Ta

Tb

Turlock Lake Formation, 600 Ka

0.547
0.587 0.550

4.31 .. 8.23 3.81
__ ..

2.42
5.50 3.64
._

197.
313. 324.
..

0.780
0.986 0.822
_-

0.285
0.598 0.371
__

~
_ _. __ __

..
.. -- --

Th
8.54 16.1 11.6
-_

Tm
0.177 --

U 2.29 .. 3.53 2.49
..

Yb 1.12 1.90 1.16
__

Zr
228 214
86.5 123 147
77 76 70
166 144
83

133 CH1 134 CH1 135 CH1 135 CH1 137 CH1 138 CH1 139 CH1
140 CH2 141 CH2 142 CH2 143 CH2 144 CH2 145 CH2 146 CH2 147 CH2
148 CHS 149 CHS 150 CHS 151 CHS 152 CHS 153 CHS 154 CHS 155 CHS 156 CHS
157 CH4 158 CH4

Al 2AB 2B2H 2B22t 2B31 2B32 3IB33

12 53 88 140 234 310 350

Al A3 2A+B
2B2H 2B22 2B23 3B24 3IIB3

8 30 50 110 170 200 290 350+

Al A3 A+B
B2t B22t 2B23 3IIB24 4VB31 5B32

9 35 68 105 153 173 260 340 750+

2B31

750

4Clox 1000

China Hat gravel member of Laguna Formation, 3,000 Ka

0.453 22.4 ..
0.341 23.2

78.8 66.2

0.822 1.12

7.91 _
12.2

3.65 __
4.08

65.1 0.882 1.08

0.460 0.454

0.067 15.1 -_ «_

49.3 -_

1.27 _-

22.2 __ .. ._

2.85 _.. __

77.3 0.722 ._ __

0.335 __

-- --

__

- -- --

__ ...

__ __

__

_. ._

- . -- _

-__ __

-__ __

__

10.1 12.6
9.99 --
«_
__

0.38 0.16 --
--
.-

3.73 ..
4.42

1.90 2.03

292 241

4.25 __

1.49

142

--.

-_-

Soils Developed in Granitic Alluvium near Merced, California A65

GPO 785-048/48019

