Mineral Resources of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1741-A

Chapter A
Mineral Resources of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon
By DEAN B. VANDER MEULEN, J.J. RYTUBA, H.D. KING, and D. PLOUFF U.S. Geological Survey
DOUGLAS F. SCOTT U.S. Bureau of Mines
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1741
MINERAL RESOURCES OF WILDERNESS STUDY AREAS: EAST-CENTRAL OREGON

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR DONALD PAUL MODEL, Secretary
U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY Dallas L. Peck, Director

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, WASHINGTON : 1987
For sale by the Books and Open-File Reports Section U.S. Geological Survey Federal Center, Box 25425 Denver, CO 80225

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Mineral resources of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon.

U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1741-A

Includes bibliography

Supt. of Docs. No.: I 19.3:1741-A

1. Mines and mineral resources Oregon Honeycombs

Wilderness. 2. Geology Oregon Honeycombs

Wilderness. 3. Honeycombs Wilderness (Or.) I. Vander

Meulen, Dean B. II. Series.

QE75.B9 No. 1741-A

557.3 s

86-600350

[TN24.07]

[553'.09795'97]

STUDIES RELATED TO WILDERNESS
Bureau of Land Management Study Areas
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act (Public Law 94-579, October 21, 1976) requires the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Bureau of Mines to conduct mineral surveys on certain areas to determine the mineral values, if any, that may be present. Results must be made available to the public and be submitted to the President and the Congress. This report presents the results of a mineral survey of a part of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area (OR-003-77A), Malheur County, Oregon.

CONTENTS

Summary Al Abstract 1 Character and setting 1 Identified resources 3 Mineral resource potential 3
Introduction 3 Area description 3 Previous and present investigations 3 Acknowledgments 6
Appraisal of identified resources 6 History and production 6 Mines, prospects, claims, and mineralized areas 6 Appraisal of mineral resources 6 Recommendations for further work 7
Assessment of mineral resource potential 7 Geology 7 Geochemical studies 8 Geophysical studies 9
Conclusions 9 References cited 10 Appendix 1. Definition of levels of mineral resource potential and certainty of assessment

14

FIGURES
1. Index map showing location of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon A2 2. Map showing geology and mineral resource potential of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur
County, Oregon 4 3. Major elements of mineral resource potential/certainty classification 14

TABLE 1. Mines, prospects, claims, and mineralized areas in and adjacent to the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area,
Malheur County, Oregon A12

MINERAL RESOURCES OF WILDERNESS STUDY AREAS: EAST-CENTRAL OREGON
Mineral Resources of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon

By Dean B. Vander Meulen, J.J. Rytuba, H.D. King, and D. Plouff U.S. Geological Survey
Douglas F. Scott U.S. Bureau of Mines

SUMMARY
Abstract
The Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area (OR003-77A) encompasses approximately 39,000 acres adjacent to the Owyhee Reservoir in eastern Oregon. Field work was conducted by the U.S. Geological Survey during 1983 and 1984, and by the U.S. Bureau of Mines during 1984, to evaluate the mineral resources and the mineral resource potential of the study area. At the request of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Bureau of Mines conducted field studies of 36,284 acres, of the 39,000 acre Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area. No mineral resources were identified in the study area. However, the study indicates moderate potential for uranium, thorium, and lithium resources in sedimentary and volcanic rocks, moderate potential for arsenic, lead, mercury, molybdenum, and zinc resources in caldera moat-fill sedimentary rocks and quartz veins, and moderate potential for arsenic and mercury resources in hydrothermal vein systems. The study area has moderate potential for zeolite resources in air-fall tuff beds and tuffaceous

sedimentary rocks, moderate potential for geothermal resources, and low potential for zinc resources in volcanic rocks. The study area has low potential for fluorite resources in lacustrine deposits, low potential for tin and copper resources in hydrothermal vein systems, and low potential for petroleum and natural gas resources in sedimentary rocks. The eastern part of the study area has identified resources of "picture jasper." In this report, the area studied is referred to as the "wilderness study area", or simply "the study area."
Character and Setting
The study area is located in the northern Basin and Range physiographic province approximately 50 mi west of Boise, Idaho, and 40 mi north of Jordan Valley, Oregon (fig. 1). Topography and drainage are dominated by north-trending ridges and valleys, deeply eroded east-trending canyons, and the north-trending Owyhee River canyon (Owyhee Reservoir). These features generally reflect local fault patterns. The northern topographic margin of the Mahogany Mountain caldera extends east-west across the southern third of the study area (fig. 2). The caldera

Al

43 30 -

Graded

Gravel /

PART OF THE

Road \ j

HONEYCOMBS WILDERNESS j STUDY AREA (OR-003-77AV

43" 15-
Figure 1. Index map showing location of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon,

A2

collapse structure forms a topographic low south of the caldera margin. Rhyolitic flows and volcaniclastic rocks of Miocene age (5 to 24 million years before present, or Ma; see Geologic Time Chart, last page of this report) form a thick basal section and are the oldest rocks in the region. The rhyolitic flows are overlain by sedimentary rocks interbedded with ashflow and air-fall tuffs. Dikes, plugs, and sills of basalt, andesite, and rhyolite intrude the entire sequence. Basalt flows of Pliocene and Pleistocene age cap the stratigraphic section.
Identified Resources
No mineral resources were identified in the study area.
Mineral Resource Potential
The north-central and southern parts of the study area have moderate potential for uranium and thorium resources. High anomalous concentrations of these elements occur in rhyolite tuff, rhyolite intrusions, and tuffaceous sedimentary rocks. The mineral resource potential rating is based on anomalous aerial gammaray values and anomalous concentrations of uranium and thorium in rock samples.
The north-central and southern parts of the study area have moderate potential for strata-bound lithium resources, and low potential for volcanogenic disseminated-zinc resources.
Areas adjacent to the Mahogany Mountain caldera topographic margin (fig. 2, stipple pattern) have moderate potential for mercury and arsenic resources. Rocks exposed along fault and fracture zones parallel to the caldera wall are locally hydrothermally altered and silicified. Geochemical analyses indicate anomalous concentrations of mercury and arsenic in these altered rocks. Although no gold was detected in the samples analyzed, mercury and arsenic are good pathfinder elements for gold resources.
An area south of the caldera topographic margin has moderate potential for arsenic, molybdenum, lead, and zinc resources. Anomalous concentrations of these elements are found in silicified and pyritized moat-fill sedimentary rocks (fig. 2, unit Ts south of the caldera margin). Potential mineral resources associated with post-caldera ring-fracture volcanism, and caldera-related hydrothermal activity are depicted as a single area of resource potential on figure 2 (stipple pattern).
Numerous high-silica rhyolite intrusions (fig. 2, unit Tr) located in the southern and central parts of the study area have moderate potential for arsenic, mercury, and zinc resources. The rhyolite intrusions are locally brecciated and cut by quartz veins. Geochemical analyses indicate that the brecciated rhyolite contains anomalous concentrations of these elements.
The study area has low potential for copper, tin,

and fluorite resources. Anomalous concentrations of

copper are probably associated with fracture fillings in

mafic and intermediate intrusions. The anomalously

high tin concentrations seem to be spatially associated

with rhyolite intrusions.

Anomalous fluorite

concentrations are probably associated with diagenetic

fluorite in lacustrine deposits.

The study area has moderate potential for

zeolite resources. Although zeolite concentrations are

highest in air-fall tuff layers, they occur in various

rock types throughout the study area.

The study area has moderate potential for

geothermal energy resources. Numerous thermal

springs and wells occur north of the study area. One

area near the northern boundary is underlain by a

thermal water reservoir less than 1,000 m from the

surface (Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral

Industries, 1982).

Sedimentary rocks in the northern and central

parts of the study area have low potential for

petroleum and natural gas resources. A seismic study

and drilling program are needed to help determine

their resource potential.

Prospects and claims located near the eastern

boundary of the study area (fig. 2) contain identified

resources of "picture jasper." "Picture jasper" is a

locally derived name for cryptocrystalline, nearly

opaque, variegated silica containing as much as 1

percent disseminated pyrite (Scott, 1986). Picture

jasper commonly occurs along known fault and

fracture zones.

INTRODUCTION

Area Description
The Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area (OR003-77A) consists of approximately 39,000 acres in the north-central Basin and Range physiographic province of eastern Oregon. The area is located adjacent to the Owyhee Reservoir, approximately 30 mi west of the Idaho state line and 40 mi north of Jordan Valley, Oregon (fig. 1). The study area is accessible from U.S. Highway 95 via an improved gravel road paralleling Succor Creek and several unimproved gravel roads and jeep trails. Westward-draining creeks have eroded deep gulches in the pyroclastic deposits. Normal pool elevation of the Owyhee Reservoir is 2,655 ft. The maximum elevation in the study area is about 5,000 ft along Bannock Ridge. The climate is semiarid; vegetation is sparse with sage brush and grasses dominant at all elevations. Juniper trees are found along creek bottoms and in protected gulches.

Previous and Present Investigations
A reconnaissance geologic map of the Owyhee region by Kittleman and others (1967) was used, in part, as a basis for preliminary investigations. In addition, the U.S. Geological Survey conducted a

A3

APPROXIMATE BOUNDARY OF
PART OF THE HONEYCOMBS WILDERNESS STUDY
AREA (OR-003-77A)
M/C Ll, Th, U
L/B Zn

43°20

M/C As, Hg, Pb, Mo, Zn

Tt
1 2 MILES
Figure 2. Map showing geology and mineral resource potential of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon.

A4

ERRATA FOR U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY BULLETIN 1741-A
Several commodities and their resource potential were inadvertently omitted from figure 2 (pages A4-A5). The corrections are as follows:
1. The entire study area has moderate potential for undiscovered zeolite and geothermal resources, with level C certainty.
2. The entire study area has low potential for undiscovered copper, tin, and fluorite resources, with level B certainty.
3. The Tertiary age sedimentary rocks (unit Ts) in the northern and central parts of the study area have low potential for undiscovered petroleum and natural gas resources, with level B certainty.
4. Several mines, claims, and prospects within the study area (map numbers 1-3, 5-10, 12-14, and 17) have low potential for undiscovered picture jasper resources, with level D certainty. (Also, this sentence should replace the entire last paragraph of the text on page A10 regarding picture jasper.)

EXPLANATION
AREA WITH MODERATE MINERAL RESOURCE POTENTAIL-Lithium, thorium, and uranium. See appendix 1 and figure 3 for definition of mineral resource potential and certainty of assessment.
AREA WITH MODERATE MINERAL RESOURCE POTENTIAL-Arsenic, mercury, molybdenum, lead, and zinc.

COMMODITIES
As Arsenic Hg Mercury Li Lithium Mo Molybdenum Pb Lead Th Thorium U Uranium Zn Zinc
MINES, PROSPECTS, AND CLAIMS
1. Painted Rock Canyon No. 1 claim 2. Pinto claim 3. unnamed prospect 4. Wild Horse mine 5. unnamed prospect 6. Madonna No. 3 claim 7. Betty No. 1 and Thunder Ridge claims 3. unnamed prospect 9. unnamed prospect
CORRELATION OF MAP UNITS

10. unnamed prospect 11. Desert Queen No. 2 claim 12. Owyhee Green Streak claim 13. Big 4 and More No. 1 and 2 claims 14. Lucky Sunday prospect 15. Jackpot No. 2 and JB. No. 1 claims 16. OE.T. 1-4 claims 17. Hobnob claim

"V QUATERNARY

"T- QUATERNARY AND TERTIARY

lh_-TT-IETRO-TTI-AIAROVY/
GEOLOGIC MAP UNITS Qs SURFICIAL DEPOSITS (QUATERNARY) QTb BASALT FLOWS, DIKES, AND SILLS (QUATERNARY AND TERTIARY) Ts SEDIMENTARY ROCKS (TERTIARY) Tr RHYOLJTE FLOWS, DOMES, AND DIKES (TERTIARY) Tth TUFF OF HONEYCOMBS VOLCANIC CENTER (TERTIARY) Tt TUFF (TERTIARY)
MAP SYMBOLS CONTACT
* FAULT-Bar and ball on downthrown side; dashed where uncertain V CALDERA TOPOGRAPHIC MARGIN-Teeth on downthrown side (Mahogany Mountain caldera) X MINE X PROSPECT OR CLAIM
Figure 2. Continued.

A5

combined geological (Vander Meulen and others, 1986a, b, c), geochemical, and geophysical study of the area during the 1984 and 1985 field seasons. The U.S. Bureau of Mines examined all mines, prospects, and claims in or near the study area (Scott, 1986).
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of Mike (Gruby) Grubensky, Kathy Tegtmeyer, Carol Goeldner, and Scott Minor of the U.S. Geological Survey, and Mitch Linne, Dick Winters, Andy Leszcykowski, Dale Avery, John Benham, Nick Winslow, and Brian Ballou of the U.S. Bureau of Mines, during fieldwork of this study.
APPRAISAL OF IDENTIFIED RESOURCES
By Douglas F. Scott, U.S. Bureau of Mines
History and Production
Gold placer claims were located south of Leslie Gulch (fig. 1) as early as 1906. Potash exploration began in 1915, but ended abruptly. Gemstone exploration for picture jasper may have started as early as 1932; however, most gemstone exploration began in the late 1960's and continues. Several mining exploration companies have been prospecting in and near the study area for disseminated silver and gold deposits.
At least 329 potash claims were located within the area studied during 1915; they appear to have been abandoned within one year of discovery. Since 1932, an estimated 21 claims within the present study area, and 122 claims within 2 mi of the east edge of the study area, have been located for picture jasper. Seven of these are current mining claims according to 1983 Bureau of Land Management records. At least 74 workings (pits, bulldozer cuts, and open cuts) are in or adjacent to the study area. Of these, 22 are located in the study area.
Approximately 13 placer claims are south of Leslie Gulch, and one placer claim is in the study area. Oil and gas leases occupy 6,560 acres in the northern half of the study area, according to 1983 Bureau of Land Management records.
Several tons of picture jasper have been produced in and adjacent to the study area; however, no production records are available. Value of the picture jasper varies; most of the material averages at least $2.50 per pound ($5,000 per short ton). A zeolite mineral (clinoptilolite) is mined by Teague Minerals near Adrian, Oregon, about 15 mi north of the study area. A zeolite mill, also owned by Teague Minerals, is located about 2 mi south of Adrian, Oregon and processes about 400 tons of zeolites per month (Glen Teague, personal commun., 1985). Silver and gold are produced from veins, fracture fillings, and veinlets in a caldera-related porphyritic rhyolite at the DeLamar

mine, about 30 mi east of the study area.
Mines, Prospects, Claims, and Mineralized Areas
Picture jasper is present in small quantities at each of the 6 prospects, 10 claim groups, and 1 mine that were mapped and sampled (fig. 2). Gemstone collectors work some of these deposits on a seasonal basis. The largest deposit, the Wild Horse mine (fig. 2, no. 4), is adjacent to the east boundary of the study area and is worked from June to November. Most of the surface area of the mine is overlain by at least 35 ft of ash-flow tuff of the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member of the Sucker Creek Formation (Kittleman and others, 1965; Kittleman, 1973).
Zeolites are present in air-fall tuff layers in the Sucker Creek Formation. Seventy-five samples of tuff collected at 67 locations were analyzed for zeolites. Twenty-four samples contained at least 50 percent zeolites. Zeolite composition ranged from 6 to 72 percent clinoptilolite and 15 to 55 percent mordenite. Samples with total zeolite composition greater than 50 percent (clinoptilolite and mordenite percentages combined) were tested for ammonia cation exchange capacity (CEC). CEC's ranged from 0.02 to 1.6. Erratic zeolite (CEC) values and (or) the intermittent nature of exposures of zeolite-bearing rock preclude estimation of grade, tonnage, and areal extent of any zeolite resource.
Although most of the study area was claimed in 1915 for potash, no potash occurrences were found. Seventy-four samples analyzed for potassium ranged from 0.99 to 5.4 percent potassium, values typical of unmineralized rock.
One sample of clayey, volcaniclastic material from Craig Gulch in the southern part of the area was evaluated for its possible use as a structural clay product (construction-grade brick fired at 1,000 to 1,050 °C). The sample came from a zone 2 to 3 in. thick and limited to about 100 ft of exposure; therefore, a clay resource is not apparent.
A 50-ft-long, 0.5-ft-thick carbonaceous zone exists in air-fall tuff layers in the northern part of the study area. The zone contained no detectable gold, uranium oxide, or thorium oxide.
No detectable gold was found in one placer sample collected near Mud Spring, in the southern part of the study area.
Appraisal of Mineral Resources
No significant mineral resources were identified in or adjacent to the study area.
Small amounts of picture jasper are removed annually from prospects in and adjacent to the study area.
Zeolites are found in tuff and volcanic sedimentary rocks throughout the study area; however, exposures contain erratic concentrations and are limited in size. Twenty-four samples contained zeolite concentrations greater than 50 percent. Of these,

A6

eight contain CEC's of 1.5 or more. If deposits of material approaching this grade are delimited by detailed mapping, mining companies may become interested in the area. Zeolites of this grade can be used for absorbent material.
Sand and gravel are present throughout the study area. There are adequate and more accessible deposits of sand and gravel outside the study area.
Recommendations for Further Work
Ash-flow tuff in and adjacent to the study area was sampled for the presence of zeolites. Twenty-four of 75 samples meet industry requirements for commercial zeolites. Based on these samples,detailed sampling and mapping of zeolite-bearing tuff in an area north of Leslie Gulch may reveal accumulations of zeolites.
ASSESSMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCE POTENTIAL
By Dean B. Vander Meulen, James J. Rytuba, Harley D. King, and Donald Plouff U.S. Geological Survey
Geology
The Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area is underlain by rhyolite flows, air-fall and ash-flow tuffs, interbedded arkosic and tuffaceous sedimentary rocks, basalt flows, and silicic, intermediate, and mafic intrusions. All rocks in the area are of Miocene or younger age. The volcanic and sedimentary rocks were deposited in a broad,north-plunging lacustrine basin that evolved in eastern Oregon and western Idaho beginning in late Miocene time (Gray and others, 1983).
Peralkaline rhyolite ash-flow and air-fall tuffs are the dominant rock type within the study area. Two major air-fall tuffs and four separate ash-flow tuffs are distinguishable. They are mapped together as units Tt and Tth (fig. 2). The ash-flow sheet with the greatest volume and areal extent in the study area is the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member. The tuff is divided into outflow facies, air-fall facies, and intracaldera facies. Eruption of the tuff resulted in the formation of the Mahogany Mountain caldera (Rytuba, 1985). A potassium-argon (K-Ar) age obtained from the tuff is 15.510.5 Ma. The southern third of the study area includes part of the caldera collapse structure. The intracaldera facies of the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member is the lowest exposed stratigraphic unit within the collapse structure. Overlying and interbedded with the intracaldera facies is the air-fall facies of the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member, both of which were erupted from a vent in the center of the caldera. Outflow facies of the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member overlie bedded tuffaceous siltstone, mudstone, and fine- to mediumgrained arkosic sandstone. Sedimentary rocks are exposed along the northern topographic margin of the caldera and are the oldest rocks in the study area. Fine- to coarse-grained arkosic sandstone and

interbedded tuffaceous siltstone overlie the outflow facies of the tuff. Stratigraphically above these sedimentary rocks is the ash-flow tuff of Spring Creek.
The tuff of Spring Creek and sedimentary rocks thicken to the north and east. The thickest sections of the tuff of Spring Creek are localized within the moat of the Mahogany Mountain caldera and along the eastcentral margin of the study area. Moat-fill sedimentary rocks (confined to the subsided part of the caldera collapse structure) overlie the tuff of Spring Creek and the Leslie Gulch air-fall deposit. The moatfill sedimentary rocks are thin-bedded, fine-grained sandstone, siltstone, and shale locally altered and mineralized.
Two north-striking rhyolite dike systems intrude the floor of the Mahogany Mountain caldera. The rhyolite dikes are exposed in the southernmost part of the study area (fig. 2), parallelling both sides of a graben in the resurgent dome of the Mahogany Mountain caldera. Potassium-argon ages obtained from the rhyolite dikes are 14.7±0.4 Ma and 14.9±0.4 Ma. The caldera margin within the study area is intruded by one rhyolite dome and several rhyolite plugs and dikes. A K-Ar age obtained from one of the rhyolite plugs is 14.910.4 Ma. Rhyolite domes and plugs are common along the southeastern boundary of the study area. Rhyolite intrusions are locally brecciated, silicified, and cut by quartz veins.
The Honeycombs volcanic center (Vander Meulen and others, 1986b), located in the north-central part of the study area, contains voluminous air-fall tuff and several rhyolite dikes and plugs. Near-vent air-fall deposits form coalescing pumice cones armored with rhyolite agglutinate. Distal vent deposits are wellbedded pumice lapilli air-fall tuff. The tuff and pumice cones were subsequently intruded by rhyolite dikes and plugs, all with a similar high-silica rhyolite composition. Geochemical and stratigraphic relations suggest that the tuff erupted from the Honeycombs volcanic center is younger than the tuff erupted from the Mahogany Mountain caldera.
North-dipping volcaniclastic and arkosic sedimentary rocks onlap the air-fall tuff in the northern part of the Honeycombs volcanic center. An intermediate-to-mafic, lithic-rich palagonite ash-flow tuff is interbedded with the sedimentary rocks. The sequence of volcanic and sedimentary rocks is intruded by numerous dikes and sills of pyroxene andesite. Pyroxene andesite is exposed in large sills (2 to 3 mi long) that intrude tuffs of the Honeycombs volcanic center, and in north-trending dikes cutting sedimentary rocks immediately north and west of the Honeycombs volcanic center. Basalt flows, dikes, and sills cap and (or) intrude the entire sequence of sedimentary rocks in the northern part of the study area. The basaltic rocks are the youngest volcanic rocks in the study area.
Stream-bed and alluvial-fan deposits form the thickest accumulations of Quaternary sediment in the study area. Lag gravels and colluvium form extensive veneer deposits on low-angle slopes and terraces.
The study area is located within the Basin and Range physiographic province, a region characterized by extensional tectonism. Volcanic and sedimentary rocks of Miocene age within the study area are broken

A7

by several north- to north-northwest-trending horst and graben stuctures; the resulting fault blocks form the dominant structural pattern in the study area. The central part of the Owyhee reservoir is located within a north-trending graben, which is the largest fault block in the study area. Normal faults along the west side of the Owyhee reservior (fig. 2) help delineate the graben. Poorly exposed, northwest-trending faults cross the northern and central part of the study area. These faults control tributary drainage and truncate north-trending normal faults. Faults in the southern part of the study area reflect both east-west extension and collapse along an east-west-trending caldera ring fracture. The topographic margin of the Mahogany Mountain caldera is, in part, controlled by northtrending normal faults, indicating caldera collapse may have occurred along preexisting north-trending normal faults.
Geochemical Studies
In 1984, the U.S. Geological Survey conducted a geochemical study of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area based on the analysis of stream sediments, stream-sediment heavy-mineral concentrates, and rock samples. Geochemical data obtained from streamsediment analyses represents the composite chemistry of rock units in a particular drainage basin. Drainage basins within the study area range from 0.5 to several square miles in size.
Fifty-three stream-sediment samples, 49 heavymineral-concentrate samples, and 12 rock samples were analyzed for 31 elements by six-step semiquantitative emission-spectrographic methods (Myers and others, 1961; Grimes and Marranzino, 1968). Several samples were analyzed by inductively coupled argon plasma atomic-emission spectroscopy (ICAP-AES) (Crock and others, 1983) using a modification of the O'Leary and Viets digestion method (1986). Atomic-absorption and cold-vapor atomic-absorption methods were used to determine concentrations of gold and mercury (Thompson and others, 1968; Koirtyohann and Khalil, 1976).
Peralkaline rhyolite tuffs and intrusions, which comprise the Honeycombs volcanic center (unit Tth, fig. 2), have the highest uranium (12 parts per million, or ppm) and thorium (20 ppm) concentration in the study area. Tuffaceous sedimentary rocks derived from the Honeycombs volcanic center also have high uranium and thorium contents. Aerial gamma-ray surveys (EG and G geoMetrics, 1979), which cover part of the Honeycombs volcanic center, revealed uranium and thorium anomalies over the volcanic center approaching five times one standard deviation from the mean uranium and thorium concentrations for rocks in the Boise 2° quadrangle. The anomalies closely correspond to the distribution of rock types within the Honeycombs volcanic center and associated tuffaceous sedimentary rocks. The anomalies most likely reflect high magmatic concentrations of the elements dispersed throughout the strata, rather than local high-grade concentrations of uranium and thorium. Although no zones of hydrothermal alteration were noted in or adjacent to intrusive rocks within the Honeycombs volcanic center, vein-type

uranium deposits typically associated with peralkaline may be present at depth.
Peralkaline rhyolite tuffs and intrusions associated with the Mahogany Mountain caldera have high uranium (8 ppm) and thorium (18 ppm) contents. Aerial gamma-ray surveys (EG and G geoMetrics, 1979), which cover part of the caldera, show uranium anomalies over the caldera. The anomalies likely reflect the high concentrations of uranium
present in the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member and rhyolite intrusions associated with the Mahogany Mountain
caldera. Hydrothermal alteration associated with rocks intruded by rhyolite along the margin of the caldera, as well as geochemical anomalies of arsenic, mercury, molybdenum and zinc, indicate that local high-grade concentrations of uranium and thorium may be present. Vein-type uranium deposits in the McDermitt caldera complex (Rytuba and Glanzman, 1979) are associated with peralkaline rhyolite intrusions and may be present within the Mahogany Mountain caldera complex. Sedimentary rocks that fill the moat of the caldera have been zeolitized, silicified, and pyritized. Geochemical anomalies of arsenic, mercury, zinc, and molybdenum in these rocks indicate the possible existence of stratiform uranium deposits similar to those associated with the peralkaline calderas in the McDermitt volcanic field
(Rytuba, 1981). Lithium concentration in peralkaline volcanic
and volcaniclastic rocks associated with the Honeycombs volcanic center and the Mahogany Mountain caldera is the highest known for peralkaline rocks ( 200 ppm). High initial concentrations of lithium in the volcanic rocks, as well as widespread occurrences of zeolites in these rocks, suggest that stratiform lithium deposits, similar to occurrences in peralkaline rhyolite of the McDermitt caldera (Rytuba, 1981), may be present in the study area.
The peralkaline rhyolite associated with the Honeycombs volcanic center and the Mahogany Mountain caldera has the highest zinc concentration for peralkaline rocks known to the authors. The high zinc content of the peralkaline rhyolite is attributed to chlorine enrichment of the magma (Rytuba, 1981). Fifty rock samples of ash-flow and air-fall tuff were analyzed for zinc by X-ray fluorescence (kevex).
Concentrations typically ranged from 200 to 500 ppm, with some values as high as 700 ppm (T. L. Vercoutere, written commun., 1986).
Various rock types along the Mahogany Mountain
caldera ring fracture are hydrothermally altered and silicified. Samples of intracaldera tuff collected from a silicified fracture, which trends parallel to the northern caldera margin, contain anomalous concentrations of arsenic (120 ppm) and mercury (0.7 ppm). Samples of silicified and pyritized moat-fill sedimentary rock collected a little south of the topographic wall of the caldera contain anomalous concentrations of arsenic (140 ppm), lead (126 ppm),
molybdenum (65 ppm), and zinc (90 ppm). The northern margin of the caldera is intruded by several high-silica rhyolite plugs and dikes. Locally, rhyolite intrusions are cut by quartz veins. Samples of the fractured rhyolite and quartz veins contain anomalous concentrations of arsenic (30 ppm), mercury (2.8 ppm), and zinc (250 ppm). The high zinc content probably

A8

reflects normal magmatic enrichment and (or) concentrations derived from hydrothermal systems active during the close of the caldera cycle. No gold was detected in these samples.
Several stream-sediment samples collected in the study area contain anomalous concentrations of copper (300 to 3,000 ppm), tin (799 to 1,000 ppm), and fluorine (600 to 850 ppm) (Gray and others, 1983; Erickson and others, 1986). Samples containing anomalous concentrations of copper are restricted to the northern part of the study area and seem to be associated with intrusions of basalt and andesite. The distribution of samples containing anomalous concentrations of tin seem to correlate with rhyolite plugs and dikes in the Honeycombs volcanic center, and with dikes in the southern part of the study area. Potential tin resources in the study area may have formed in an environment similar to the tin deposits found in Tertiary rhyolite of the Black Range (Lufkin, 1976) in southwestern New Mexico. Stream-sediment samples collected in the central part of the study area contain microscopic grains of fluorite (H.D. King, written commun., 1986). Authigenic fluorite in lacustrine and tuffaceous sedimentary rocks is reported by Sheppard and Gude (1969) 30 mi southeast of the study area. Diagenetic fluorite in lacustrine and tuffaceous sedimentary rocks may occur in the study area.
Near the eastern boundary of the study area, identified resources of picture jasper are mined from silicified and pyritized tuffaceous and sedimentary rocks. The pattern of alteration in the rocks roughly corresponds with known fault zones.
Geophysical Studies
The U.S. Geological Survey established 11 gravity stations in and near the study area to supplement gravity data obtained from the National Geophysics Data Center (1984). Other gravity data were obtained by Couch and Baker (1977). A preliminary Bouguer gravity-anomaly map of the study area (Plouff, 1985, unpublished map) is dominated by a north-south-elongated, 8- by 20-mi gravity low with an amplitude of about 20 mGal. The gravity low probably reflects the presence of a subsided wedge of tuffaceous sediments of relatively low density within a caldera. The steep gravity gradients at the edges of the anomaly (9 mGal/mi near the south and southwest edges of the study area) indicate that the wall of the caldera is steep and the top of the intracaldera fill is buried at a shallow depth. Furthermore, the intracaldera fill is thickest where the gravity low has a minimum value, about 4 mi north of the south edge of the study area. Spatial associations indicate that the caldera may have subsided in response to depletion of an underlying magma chamber aher extrusion of the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member.
An aeromagnetic survey of the region was flown at a barometric elevation of 9,000 ft above sea level with east-west flightlines spaced at 2-mi intervals (U.S. Geological Survey, 1972). The aeromagnetic map is dominated by a north-south-elongated, 6- by 10-mi magnetic high centered over the Owyhee reservoir. The only other magnetic anomaly in the study area is a

small magnetic low located in its northwest corner. The magnetic low probably is a normal polarization effect of the large magnetic high. A small gravity high with an amplitude of less than 3 mGal nearly coincides with the crest of the large magnetic high. The axis of the magnetic high is located along the west edge of the gravity low. Therefore, although the two geophysical anomalies are roughly the same size, the lack of coincidence suggests a separate source for the magnetic anomaly. The magnetic high may reflect a large intrusive body with moderate to high magnetization centered beneath the west wall of the caldera.
CONCLUSIONS
Geologic and geochemical investigations indicate that there are several levels of mineral resource potential in the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area.
Areas within the Honeycombs volcanic center and Mahogany Mountain caldera (fig. 2) have moderate potential for lithium, thorium, and uranium mineral resources with level C certainty. The mineral resource potential rating is based on anomalous concentrations of these elements in rock samples, and anomalous aerial gamma-ray values for thorium and uranium. The level of certainty rating is based on the preceeding data, and genetic models presented in previous sections that describe possible resourceforming processes. See appendix 1 and figure 3 for definitions of levels of mineral resource potential and certainty.
Large volumes of peralkaline rhyolite tuff associated with the Honeycombs volcanic center and Mahogany Mountain caldera have extraordinarily high zinc concentrations. Volcanogenic disseminated-zinc resources of this type were previously unrecognized; therefore, low potential for zinc resources is assigned to areas underlain by the rhyolite tuff, with level B certainty.
Rocks present along the northern margin of the Mahogany Mountain caldera contain anomalous concentrations of arsenic, lead, mercury, molybdenum, and zinc. Hydrothermal systems active during the close of the caldera cycle likely concentrated these elements; therefore, areas adjacent to the caldera margin (fig. 2, stipple pattern) have moderate potential for arsenic, lead, mercury, molybdenum, and zinc resources, with level C certainty.
The study area has low potential for copper, tin and fluorite resources, with level B certainty. The mineral resource potential rating is based on anomalous concentrations of these elements in soil samples.
The study area has moderate potential for zeolite resources, with level C certainty. Zeolite minerals occur in various rock types throughout the study area, with the highest concentrations occurring in air-fall tuff beds.
Resource potential for geothermal energy in the study area is moderate, certainty level C. An unnamed hot spring is located along a north-trending normal fault 3 mi southwest of the study area. Recorded temperature of the spring water is 50° C (Bliss, 1983). Several thermal springs and wells are

A9

located about 10 mi north of the study area (Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, 1982). One area, less than 3 mi north of the northwest boundary of the study area, may be underlain at shallow depth (less than 1,000 m) by thermal water of sufficient temperature for direct heat applications (Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, 1982).
Sedimentary rocks in the northern and central parts of the study area have low potential for petroleum and natural gas resources, with level B certainty. The sedimentary rocks are intruded and interbedded with volcanic rocks. Heat which accompanied the volcanic intrusions likely destroyed nearby petroleum and natural gas reservoirs. A drilling program in conjunction with seismic studies is needed to test the sedimentary rocks for the presence of hydrocarbons.
Several prospects and claims, and one mine near the eastern boundary of the study area contain identified resources of picture jasper, with level D certainty. The deposits are small, commonly restricted to silicified and pyritized fault and fracture zones. Because of the small and confined nature of the deposits, the economic value of the picture jasper is considered low.
REFERENCES CITED
Bliss, J.D., 1983, Oregon; basic data for thermal springs and wells as recorded in Geotherm: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-435, 247 P'
Couch, R.W., and Baker, B., 1977, Geophysical investigations of the Vale-Owyhee Geothermal Region, Malheur County, Oregon: Oregon State University Technical Report No. 2 to the Geothermal Research Program of the U.S. Geological Survey, 52 p.
Crock, J.G., Lichte, F.E., and Briggs, P.H., 1983, Determination of elements in National Bureau of Standards' Geological Reference Materials SRM278 Obsidian and SRM688 Basalt by Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry: Geostandards Newsletter, v. 7, p. 335-340.
EG and G geoMetrics, 1979, Aerial gamma ray and magnetic survey - Idaho project, Hailey, Idaho Falls, Elk City quadrangles of Idaho/Montana and Boise quadrangle, Oregon/Idaho, (contract DEAC13-76GJ01664, subcontract no. 79-323-5): U.S. Department of Energy Open-File Report GJBX-10 (80), Available through U.S. Geological Survey Branch of Open File Services, Denver, CO , 114 p.
Erickson, M.S., Malcolm, M.J., Hoffman, J.D., and King, H.D., 1986, Analytical results and sample locality maps of stream-sediment and heavymineral-concentrate samples from the Honeycombs (OR-003-77A) and the Owyhee Canyon (OR-003-195) Bureau of Land Management Wilderness Study Areas, Malheur County, Oregon: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report in press .
Gray, J.J., Peterson, J.C., Clayton, J., and Baxter, G.,

1983, Geology and mineral resources of 18 BLM Wilderness Study Areas, Harney and Malheur Counties, Oregon: Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, Open-File Report 0-83-2, 106 p. Goudarzi, G.H., 1984, Guide to preparation of mineral survey reports on public lands: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-787, 25 p. Grimes, D.J., and Marranzino, A.P., 1968, Directcurrent arc and alternating-current spark emission spectrographic field methods for the semiquantitative analysis of geologic materials: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 591, 6 p. Kittleman, L.R., 1973, Guide to the Geology of the Owyhee Region of Oregon: University of Oregon Museum of Natural History Bulletin 21, 61 p. Kittleman, L.R., Green, A.R., Hagood, A.R., Johnson, A.M., McMurray, J.M., Russell, R.A., and Weeden, D.A., 1965, Cenozoic stratigraphy of the Owyhee Region, southeastern Oregon: University of Oregon Museum of Natural History Bulletin 1, 45 PKittleman, L.R., Green, A.R., Hagood, A.R., Johnson, A.M., McMurray, J.M., Russell, R.A., and Weeden, D.A., 1967, Geologic map of the Owyhee Region, Malheur County, Oregon: University of Oregon Museum of Natural History Bulletin 8, scale 1:125,000. Koirtyohann, S.R., and Khalil, Moheb, 1976, Variables in the determination of mercury by cold vapor atomic absorption: Analytical Chemistry, v. 48, no. 1, p. 136-139. Lufkin, J.L., 1976, Oxide minerals in miarolitic rhyolite, Black Rock Range, New Mexico: American Mineralogist, v. 61, p. 425-430. Myers, A.T., Haven, R.G., and Dunton, P.J., 1961, a spectrochemical method for the semiquantitative analysis of rocks, minerals, and ores: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1084-1, p. 207-229. National Geophysical Data Center, 1984, DMA gravity file of the U.S.: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Boulder, Colo., 2 magnetic tapes. O'Leary, R.M., and Viets, J.G., 1986, Determination of antimony, arsenic, bismuth, cadmium, copper, lead, molybdenum, silver, and zinc in geological materials by atomic absorption Spectrometry using a hydrochloric acid-hydrogen peroxide digestion: Atomic Spectroscopy, v. 7, no. 1, p. 4-8.
Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, 1982, Geothermal resources of Oregon Available through Oregon Department of Mineral Industries, 1005 State Office Building, Portland, OR, 97201 , scale 1:500,000.
Plouff, Donald, 1985, Unpublished Bouguer gravityanomaly map of part of the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area, scale 1:65,000.
Rytuba, J.J., 1981, Relation of calderas to ore deposits in the western United States, in Dickinson, W. R., and Payne, W. D., eds., Relation of tectonics to ore deposits in the Southern Cordillera: Arizona Geological Society Digest, v. 14, p. 227-236.
Rytuba, J.J., and Glanzman, R.K., 1979, Relation of mercury, uranium, and lithium deposits to the McDermitt caldera complex, Nevada-Oregon:

MO

Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology, Report 33, Fifth International Association on the Genesis of Ore Deposits Quadrennial Symposium, p. 109-117. Rytuba, J.J., Vander Meulen, D.B., Plouff, Donald, and Minor, S.A., 1985, Geology of the Mahogany Mountain caldera, Oregon abs. : Geological Society of America Abstracts with Programs, v. 17, no. 4, p. 70. Scott, D.F., 1986, Mineral resources of the Honeycombs Study Area, Malheur County, Oregon: U.S. Bureau of Mines Open-File Report, MLA 30-86, 26 p. Sheppard, R.A., and Gude, A.J. 3d, 1969, Authigenic fluorite in Pliocene lacustrine rocks near Rome, Malheur County, Oregon: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 650-D, p. D69-D74. Thompson, C.E., Nakagawa, H.M., and VanSickle, G.H., 1968, Rapid analysis for gold in geologic materials, in Geological Survey Research 1968: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 600-B, p. B130-B132.

U.S. Geological Survey, 1972, Aeromagnetic map of

the Adel and parts of the Burns, Boise, and Jordan

Valley 1 by 2 degree quadrangles, Oregon: U.S.

Geological Survey Open-File Report, 1 pi., scale

1:250,000.

Vander Meulen, D.B., Rytuba, J.J., Grubensky, M.J.,

and Goeldner, C.A., 1986a, Geologic map of the

Bannock Ridge 7.5' quadrangle, Malheur County,

Oregon: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous

Field Studies Map MF-1903A, scale 1:24,000.

Vander Meulen, D.B., Rytuba, J.J., Grubensky, M.J.,

Vercoutere, T.L., and Minor S.A., 1986b, Geologic

map of Pelican Point 7.5' quadrangle, Malheur

County, Oregon:

U.S. Geological Survey

Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-1904B, scale

1:24,000.

Vander Meulen, D.B., Rytuba, J.J., Vercoutere, T.L.,

and Minor, S.A., 1986c, Geologic map of the

Rooster comb 7.5" quadrangle, Malheur County,

Oregon: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous

Field Studies Map MF-1902C, scale 1:24,000.

All

Table 1. Mines, claims, and prospects in and adjacent to the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area [ (*) indicates outside study area ]

Map No. 1

Name Painted Rock Canyon No. 1 claim
Pinto claim
Unnamed prospect
Wild Horse mine
Unnamed prospect
Madonna No. 3 claim Betty No. 1 and Thunder Ridge
claims
Unnamed prospect
Unnamed prospect

Geology

Workings / Produc t ion

Sample Data

Tabular outcrop of vitrophyre exposed in Sucker Creek Fm. Mafic rocks capped by zone of red oxidized mafic rocks and volcanic detritus.
Fractures in Leslie Gulch Tuff Member are filled with green limonite-stained cryptocrystalline silica.

No workings; no known production; claim prospected for picture jasper.
1 trench 125 ft long, 12 ft wide, and 3 ft deep prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

Four samples: 2 chip samples from mafic sill, one grab sample of sill rock contained no gold or silver; 1 chip and 1 grab sample contain <5.7 percent iron oxide; 1 grab sample of oxidized zone contains no gold, silver or iron oxide.
1 select sample of silica contained no gold or silver.

Gray to white, clayey, poorly consolidated volcaniclastic rock.

3 shallow pits, each < 25 ft long and 12 ft wide, were prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

2 chip samples of volcaniclastic rock contained no diatoms, and from 2.3 to 3.3 percent potassium, 0.03 percent chlorine, and 0.14 to 0.26 percent sulfate.

5-ft-thick fracture zone in Leslie Tuff Member filled with limonite-stained brown to blue cryptocrystalline silica; fault adjacent to fracture strikes N. 37°-5V W. and dips /;7°-75° SW; fau] t contains brecciated cryptocrystalline silica with <1 percent disseminated pyrite.

1 open cut about 300 ft long, 40 ft wide, and 20 ft deep, 1 trench 60 ft long by 20 ft and 3 ft deep, and 3 shallow trenches <50 ft long and 12 ft wide were mined in 1984 for picture jasper; no known production.

10 samples: 4 chips of silica, 2 chip and 4 grab samples of tuff; of 9 samples analyzed, none contained gold, 1 contained 0.2 oz/ton silver, 1 contained 6 ppm antimony, 5 contained 4.0-8.3 ppm arsenic, 1 contained low concentrations of mercury and thallium, and 1 contained 8,900 ppm fluorine; of 8 samples analyzed for magnesium, all contained >150 ppm; 1 grab sample of tuff contained 15 percent mordenite, a zeo-
lite mineral.

A 2-A-ft-thick fracture zone striking N. 44° E. and dipping 80° NW. in Leslie Gulch Tuff Member is filled with limonite- and manganese-stained blue to brown cryptocrystalline silica.

2 pits <A ft in diameter and < 3 ft deep were prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

Frature zone 22 ft thick striking N. 25° W. and dipping 70° NE. in Leslie Gulch Tuff Member is filled with blue to brown cryptocrystalline silica.

Prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

1-2-ft-thick fracture

Trench 50 ft long, 12

zone in Leslie Gulch Tuff ft wide, and <3 ft deep,

Member is filled with

was prospected for

blue to green limonite- picture jasper; no known

stained cryptocrystal- production.

line silica; vitrophyre

caps the tuff.

2 samples (1 select, 1 chip) of the silica contained no gold or silver.
1 chip sample of silica contained no gold, silver, antimony, mercury, or thallium, 5 ppm arsenic, 82 ppm fluorine, and 150 ppm magnesium; 1 grab sample of tuff contained no gold or silver.
4 samples (3 chip of silica, 1 chip of tuff) collected; none contained gold or silver; of 2 samples analyzed for antimony, mercury, and thallium, none contained detectable amounts; 2 analvzed for arsenic contained 7 and 11.9 ppm; 1 contained >150 ppm magnesium.

A 5-ft-thick fracture

Pit <6 ft in diameter

zone in Leslie Gulch Tuff and < 3 ft deep was

Member is filled with

prospected for picture

gray cryptocrystalline jasper; no known pro-

silica,

duction.

1 chip sample of gray silica contained no gold, silver, antimony, mercury, thallium, or sulfate, 11 ppm arsenic, 0.004 percent chlorine, 76 ppm fluorine, 480 ppm magnesium, and 3.2 percent potassium.

Fracture zone 2.5 ft thick in Leslie Gulch Tuff Member filled with buff to green cryptocrvstalline silica.

2 trenches <50 ft long, 12 ft wide, and 3 ft deep were prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

2 chip samples of silica contained no gold or silver; 1 chip sample contained no antimony, mercury, or thallium, 15 ppm arsenic and 819 ppm magnesium.

A12

Table 1. Mines, claims , and prospects in and adjacent to the Honeycombs Wilderness Study Area Continued

Map No.

Name

Geology

Worki ngs/Product ion

Sample Oata

10 Unnamed prospect
11* Desert Queen No. 2 claim
12 Owyhee Green Streak claim
13 Big A and More claims 1 and 2

Fracture in the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member is filled with blue to green cryptocrystalline silica with <1 percent disseminated pyrite.
Buff to brown tuff of the Leslie Gulch Tuff Member.
Buff to brown tuff of Leslie Gulch Tuff Member exposed here; limonite-stained blue to
green silica found in trenches and on dumps.
Buff to brown tuff of Leslie Gulch Tuff Member is exposed here; limonite-stained blue to green silica found in trenches and on dumps.

2 shallow trenches <50 ft long and 12 ft wide were prospected for picture jasper; no known production

3 chip samples of silica were collected; 2 contained trace of gold; none contained silver; 3 contained 31, 32, and 36 ppm arsenic; none contained mercury or thallium; 1 contained 2 ppm antimony, and 1 contained >150 ppm magnesium.

3 pits, <20 ft in diameter, and 1 trench <50 ft long and 12 ft wide were prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

3 samples collected; 1 grab sample of buff-colored tuff contained no gold, silver, antimony, mercury, or thallium, 4 ppm arsenic, 200 ppm fluorine, and 1,420 ppm magnesium; 2 chip samples of tuff contained 4 and 16 percent analcime.

2 trenches <50 ft long and 12 ft wide were prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

Grab sample of silica contained no gold, silver, or mercury, and 5.7 ppm uranium.

A trenches <60 ft long and 12 ft wide were prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

thallium; 3 contained 3 ppm mercury; 8 contained 3-11 ppm arsenic and >150 nom mag-

1A Lucky Sunday prospect

Fractures in Leslie Gulch Tuff Member filled with tan to brown cryptocrystalline silica

Trench <100 ft long and 12 ft wide prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

Chip sample of silica contained no gold, silver,antimony, mercury, or thallium; sample contained 10.8 ppm arsenic, 0.03 percent chlorine, 12 ppm fluorine, 270 ppm magnesium, 2.8 percent potassium, and 0.04 percent sulfate.

15* Jackpot No. 2 and A 4-7-ft-thick fracture Trench <70 ft long and Seven chip samples of silica

J.B. No. 1 claims zone in Leslie Gulch Tuff 12 ft wide, and shallow and 5 chip and one grab of

Member filled with crypto- pit <10 ft in diameter tuff collected; of 12 analyzed

crystalline silica; ad- prospected for picture for gold, 2 contained a trace;

jacent fault zone strikes jasper; no known pro- of 12 analyzed for silver, 4

N. 75° E. and dips 68°

duction.

contained 0.1 oz/ton and 1

NE. in Leslie Gulch Tuff

contained 0.2 oz/ton; none

Member and is filled with

contained antimony, mercury,

brown to blue brecciated

or thallium; 5 contained 3-7

cryptocrystalline silica.

ppm arsenic; of 9 analyzed

for magnesium, 7 contained

> 150 ppm; 3 chip samples of

tuff contained A7-100 ppm

fluorine.

16* O.R.T 1-A claims

Fault zone striking N. 80° E. and dipping 80° SE. in Leslie Gulch Tuff Member is filled with green to blue cryptocrystalline silica.

2 shallow pits <20 ft in diameter prospected for picture jasper; no known production.

3 chip samples and 1 grab sample of silica, and 2 chip samples of tuff collected; none contained gold; 2 contained 0.1 and 0.2 oz/ton silver; of 5 analyzed for mercury and thallium, none contained detectable concentrations; 1 contained 3 ppm antimony; 5 samples contained 5-70 ppm arsenic; A contained >150 ppm magnesium.

17 Hobnob claim

A 0.5-ft-thick fracture zone in Leslie Gulch Tuff Member filled with blue to brown cryptocrystalline silica.

Trench <10O ft long and 12 ft wide was prospected for picture jasper; no known production,

2 samples of silica collected; 1 grab sample contained no gold or silver; one chip sample contained no gold, silver, antimony, arsenic, mercury, or thallium; 1 contained 150 ppm fluorine and 1,020 ppm magnesium.

A13

APPENDIX 1. Definition of levels of mineral resource potential and certainty of assessment
Mineral resource potential is defined as the likelihood of the presence of mineral resources in a defined area; it is not a measure of the amount of resources or their profitability.
Mineral resources are concentrations of naturally occurring solid, liquid, or gaseous materials in such form and amount that economic extraction of a commodity from the concentration is currently or potentially feasible.
Low mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics indicate a geologic environment where the existence of resources is unlikely. This level of potential embraces areas of dispersed mineralized rock as well as areas having few or no indications of mineralization. Assignment of low potential requires specific positive knowledge; it is not used as a catchall for areas where adequate data are lacking.
Moderate mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics indicate a geologic environment favorable for resource occurrence, where interpretations of data indicate a reasonable chance for resource accumulation, and where an application of genetic and (or) occurrence models indicates favorable ground.
High mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where geologic, geochemical, and geophysical characteristics indicate a geologic environment favorable for resources, where interpretations of data indicate a high likelihood for resource accumulation, where data support occurrence and (or) genetic models indicating presence of resources, and where evidence indicates that mineral concentration has taken place. Assignment of high resource potential requires positive knowledge that resource-forming processes have been active in at least part of the area; it does not require that occurrences or deposits be identified.
Unknown mineral resource potential is assigned to areas where the level of knowledge is so inadequate that classification of the area as high, moderate, or

low would be misleading. The phrase "no mineral resource potential" applies only to a specific resource type in a well-defined area. This phrase is not used if there is the slightest possibility of resource occurrence; it is not appropriate as the summary rating for any area.
Expression of the certainty of the mineral resource assessment incorporates a consideration of (1) the adequacy of the geologic, geochemical, geophysical, and resource data base available at the time of the assessment, (2) the adequacy of the occurrence or the genetic model used as the basis for a specific evaluation, and (3) an evaluation of the likelihood that the expected mineral endowment of the area is, or could be, economically extractable.
Levels of certainty of assessment are denoted oy letters, A-D (fig. 3).
A. The available data are not adequate to determine the level of mineral resource potential. Level A is used with an assignment of unknown mineral resource potential.
B. The available data are adequate to suggest the geologic environment and the level: of mineral resource potential, but either evidence is insufficient to establish precisely the likelihood of resource occurrence, or occurrence and (or) genetic models are not known well enough for predictive resource assessment.
C. The available data give a good indication of the geologic environment and the level of mineral resource potential, but additional evidence is needed to establish precisely the likelihood of resource occurrence, the activity of resource-forming processes, or available occurrence and (or) genetic models are minimal for predictive applications.
D. The available data clearly define the geologic environment and the level of mineral resource potential, and indicate the activity of resourceforming processes. Key evidence to interpret the presence or absence of specified types of resources is available, and occurrence and (or) genetic models are adequate for predictive resource assessment.

U/A

H/B HIGH POTENTIAL

H/C HIGH POTENTIAL

H/D HIGH POTENTIAL

M/B

M/C

M/D

UNKNOWN POTENTIAL

MODERATE POTENTIAL

MODERATE POTENTIAL

MODERATE POTENTIAL

L/B L/C

LOW POTENTIAL

LOW POTENTIAL

L/D LOW POTENTIAL
N/D NO POTENTIAL

BC LEVEL OF CERTAINTY
Figure 3. Major elements of mineral resource potential/certainty classification.

A14

GEOLOGIC TIME CHART Terms and boundary ages used by the U.S. Geological Survey in this report

EON

ERA

PERIOD

EPOCH

AGE ESTIMATES OF BOUNDARIES
(in Ma)

Phanerozoic
Proterozoic Archean

Cenozoic
Mesozoic
Paleozoic
Late Proterozoic Middle Proterozoic Early Proterozoic
Late Archean Middle Archean
Early Archean

Quaternary

Tertiary

Neogene Subperiod
Paleogene Subperiod

Cretaceous Jurassic

Triassic Permian
Pennsylvanian Carboniferous
Mississippian Devonian

Si unan

Ordovician

Cambrian

Holocene Pleistocene
Pliocene Miocene Oligocene

- 0.010 - 1.7 -5 - 24

Eocene

Paleocene
Late Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Middle
Early

aa
- 96 _no

Late Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Early
Late Middle
Early
Late Middle
Early

- 410

Late Middle Early
Late Middle
Early

- 500
_ _, c~7fi1
Qftrt

- 1600 ocnfi

- 3000 - 3400

pre Ar :hean 2

-(3800?)- - -

-

'Rocks older than 570 Ma also called Precambrian, a time term without specific rank. 'Informal time term without specific rank

AKKfl

A15

GPO 785-048/48028

