SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.
BY
LESTER F. W"ARD.
357

I
CONTENTS.
Page. I .-On the term "Paleobotany )' .............. __ ......................... . 363 H .-Interrelations of geology and biology _. . . . . . . . ... _................. . 363 II I.-Scope of the present paper .. _.. ..................................... . 364 IV.-Needof acondensede:xhibit. ...................... ~ -- --- -··---- ..... . 364 V.-l"uture prospects ofpaleobotauy .......... ____ ...... ------ ...... ------ 365 VI.-Interdependence of botanJr and paleobotany ........ __ ................ . ;{G6 VII.-Historical review of paleobotanical discovery ........................ . 368
A.-Biographical sketches .. _...... . .......................... ---- 368 1. Scheuchzer ........ _............................. ~ ... . 370 ~- Schlotheirn ....... _....... _.... _..................... . 370 3. Sternberg ................................ . .. .... .... . 371 4. Bronguiart . ..... ..................... . . : ..... -: ... --- 372 5. '¥itharn _........... _.......................... - ..... - 372 6. Goppert ___ ... . .... ___ . ___ _.............. . .......... . 373 7. Corda __ ............................. : . ....... ---- .. -. 374 f:l. Geinitz ......... ·- ...............•.................... 374 9. Binney ........ . ...... .. ... . ... . ..................... . :374
· 10._ Unger .. ~-- ...................... ------ ·------ ...... -- 375 11. Schimper . ............. ...... ......................... . 375 12. Williamson . ......................................... · 376 13. Lesquere ux .. . . __ ................................... . 376 14. Dawso11 .... . ____ .... .................................. . 377 15. Heer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... ........................ . 378 16. Bunbury ........ __ ..... ............................. . . 379 17. Massalongo ......... :. ............................... . 379 18. Ettingshausen ............ ... ....................·... . 380 19. Ne'vberry . . . ........... _....................... ; ... . 381 20. Schenk ................. _.. __ ....................... . 382 21. Saporta ............................................ -- 383 22. Carruthers . ........ .. ......................... -- .. --- 384
B.-Sketch of the early history and subsequent progress of paleobotany ............................................ .. . ..... . 385 1. The pre-scientific period .............. . .............. . 385 2. The scientific period ................................. . 399
.VIII.-Nomenclature and classification of fossil plants ....................... . 425 IX.-The natural me:hod as indicated by paleobotany ..................... . 431 · 1. Types of vegetation ........... .... ................ , ... ....... . . 432 2. ·The Linnrean system ...... ----'···· .... ·--------------------- .. 433 :~. Systems of the Jussieus .....................•................. 434 4. System of modern botanists .............................. _.._.. " 435 5. Modified system proposed ........ ~ ....... . ..................... . 436 6; Classification oft.he cryptogams .............................. . 437 7. Geognostico-botanical view of the plant life of the globe ...... . 439 359

#> .
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page. PLATE LVI.-Diagram No.1, showing the relative predominence of each prin.
cipal type of vegetation at each geological period (colored).. 443 LVII.-Diagram No.2, showing the observed origin and development
of the principal types of vegetation in geologic time . . . . . . . . 450 LVIII.-Diagram No. 3, showing the assumed origin and develo:!lment
of the principal types of vegetation in geologic time.... . . . . 452 361

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.(
By LESTER F. WARD.
I.-ON THE TERM "PALEOBOTANY."
The term paleobotany bas the ad vantage of brevity over the morQ common expressions vegetable paleontology and phytopaleontology, while at the same time its etymologic deriYation from two purely Greek words renders it _equally legitimate. Still, neither of the other terms should be entirely discarded. V\"~"hile it is always necessary to use the specific term for the science of fossil plants, the practice of employing the generic term paleontology when treating of animal remains only seems obj ectionable. ·The corresponding term paleozoology shou1d be recognized, and used wheuever the more restricted expressions vertebrate paleontol-ogy and invertebrate paleontology are inapplicable. It is thus only that the terminology o~ the science becomes consistent and itself scientific.
I !I.-INTERRELATIONS OF GEOLOGY ,aND BIOLOGY.
The s cience of' paleoutology bas two objects, the one geologic, the
other biologic. The history of tbe earth is to a large extent the history of its life, and the record which organic life lea,:res constitutes the principal index to the age of its successive strata. In paleozoology this record is implieitly relied upon and · forms the solid foundation of geological science. In paleobotany so much cannot be said, yet it too bas .already rendered valuable service to geology, and is often the only guide furnished by nature to the solution of important problems.
The contribution that paleontology thus makes to the history of the earth-to geology-is not more interesting than t.hat which it makes to the history of the earth's life-to biology. No questions are more en. grossmg, nor in fact more practically important for man as one of the living forms developed on the earth, than those that pertain to the origin and development of the various forms of life, ~nd a knowledge of the past life of the globe is that by which we are enabled to understand its
1 Being a preliminary draft of a portion of the introduction to a "Compendium of P aleobotany," in preparation.

..

364

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTAN~

present life as a product of development. PaleozoOlogy has already thrown a flood of light upon the true nature of animal life as it now exists, and now paleobotany is rapidly coming to the aid of those who have hitherto so long groped in darkness relative to .the origin, development, and distribution of the plant life of the globe.

III.-SCOPE OF THE PRESENT PAPER.
With the second of these objects the present work is only incidentally concerned, its chief aim being to secure, so far as its influence extends, the better realization of the first. Still, it cannot be denied that a considerable degree of mutual dependence subsists between the biologic and the geologic standpoints. To understand the true force of the _facts of paleobotany as arguments for geology it is essential that their full biologic significance be grasped. It has therefore been deemed proper, in this introduction to the several tabular and systematic statements which will make up the bulk of the volume and bear chiefly upon the geological aspect of the subject, to consider certain of the more important biologic questions, in addition to the specially geologic ones, and to discuss, from an historical and developmental standpoint, some of the leading problems of modern phytology.

IV.-NEED OF A CONDENSED EXHIBIT.
First of all it must be insisted upon that., notwithstanding the large amount of work that has been done in PFtleobotany and the somewhat formidable litt:>rature which it possesses, the pr~sent state of the science is far from satisfactory when regarded as a guide to the attainment of either of the ends above mentioned. Its value, as compared with that of paleozoOlogy, in the determination of the age of formations in which vegetable remains are discovered is very small, yet it may well be asked whether the habit of discounting the testimony of fossil plants, acquired at a time when much less was known than now, may not have been continued to an extent which is no longer warranted by the present state of our knowledge. Whether this be so or not, it is at least certain that the real present insufficiency of this department of paleontology as an exact and reliable index to geologic succession is largely due to the exceedingly fragmentary and desultory character of the science, considered as a body of truth, and that a proper and careful collation and systemization of the facts already in the possession of science will add in a high degree to their value in this respect. It was this consideration, so obvious to me from the beginning of my investigations in paleobot~ any, that nioved me to undertake the compilation of this work, and it

WARD. ]

PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

365

bas been the growing importance of this same consideration, becoming more apparent at every step, that bas impelled and encouraged me throughout its laborious preparation. . It is especially in America that this want of methodical arrange~
1
ment in paleobotany has been most keenly felt. The most important works on fossil plants have been published since the last attempt of this kind was made in Europe, and very little of our knowledge of the science has ever been embodied in any of the works of this class. The literature of this-country is seattered throughout the scientific serials aud official publications of the various geological surveys, and the few . more comprehensive works that have appeared not onlyleave this branch of the subject in great doubt and confusion, but contain, besides, many fundamental misconceptions and positive errors.
\Yhatever degree of inadequacy paleobotany may reveal for the solution of geologic questions, no one can deny that it.s value can never
be fairly judged until its materials are first so classified and arranged
that all the light that can be shed by them on any given problem can be
directed full upon it and the problem deliberately studied by it. When this ·can be accomplished, even should it do no more than emphasize the insufficiency of the data, it would, even then, have the effect of pointing out the proper direction of future research with a view to increasing the material and perfecting the data. This work has been conceiyed and is being conducted primarily to this end of thus focalizing, as it were, the knowledge already extant in this department of research, and of bringing it to bear with its full force, however feeble this may be, upon the questions to whose solution It is capable of being legitimately applied.

V.-FUTURE PROSPECTS OF PALEOBOTANY.
While it is' particularly as a contribution to American science, and with special reference to its application to American geology that the work has been undertaken, still, for many and obvious reasons it was found impossible to confine it to purely American facts. The usefu1ness, for the purpose intended, of any such compilation increases in an accelerated ratio as its scope is expanded, and its value only begins to tle really gr~· at when it approaches complete universality and compasses the whole field of facts so far as known within its particular department. While this would be true of any science, it is conspicuously so of paleobotany, where, more than anywhere else, the record is so notably incomplete. A more special reason in this case lies in the fact, only recently so strongly felt by paleobotanists, that the :floras of the successive epochs in the history of the earth 'have been differentiating and becoming more ., and more varied according to their degree of territorial separation, so that in studying them in reverse order _we find greater and greater uni-

366 SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.
formity over the whole globe as we go back in time. The fact that even the Tertiary floras of the most remote regions of the world possess a striking resemblance among one another, wholly unknown among existing floras, has only just now fairly revealed its~lf to science, and found its striking confirmation in the very recent work 2 of Baron von Ettingshausen on the Tertiary Flora of Australia. This uniform character of the fossil floras of different epochs, combined with their variation from one epoch to another, iendR hope to paleobotany and leads to the belief that when we shall have learned with precision the true characteristics of each flora-learned to distinguish the accidental from the essential, and geographic from chronologie characteristics-we shall be in a condition to apply the data at hand to the explanation a.nd elucidation of the geologic and biologic history of the earth.
While it is upon the defectiveness of the geologic record, so far as plants help to make it, that the chief stress is .usually laid, still, could this reco~d be so edited that it could be made to convey its full meaning it would probably be found that it is really more complete than the biologic record; in other words, the knowledge we have of fossil plants would go further in explaining geologic succession and determining questions of age than it can be made to do in explaining the mode of development, distribution, and differentiation of plant forms · on the earth's suface. On the subject of geographical distribution, with which are inevitably bound up many questions of origin, variation, and descent., much has alread·y been written. De Candolle. Hooker, Gray, Grisebach, Ettingshausen, Beer, and Engler have at different times and in numerous ways .succeeded in building up a body of valuable literature relating to phytogeography. Since, however, this concerns itself- principally with explaining the origin of existing floras, chiefly dicotyledonous, it cannot reach back to the primary and doubtless ever insoluble problems of the differentiation of the great types of vegetation that have successively dominated the plant life of the globe through past geologie ages. Yet., however hopeless the task when the idea of complete solution is considered, it is nevertheless these very questions which are constantly pressing upon the thoughtful student, and he cannot suppress them if he will, or cease to recognize that they are legitimate, and that every, even the least, approach towards their solution is so much clear gain to science.
VI.-INTERDEPENDENCE OF BOTANY ~D PALEOBOTANY.
It is only quite recently that botanists have ".Jegun to turn their attention to questions of this kind. The overthrow of the doctrine of :fixity _ of species opened the door to such considerations, rendering them legiti-
!I'Beitrage :mr Kenntniss der 'l'ertiarflora Australiens. Von C. von Ettingshauae11. Denkschr. d. k. k. Akad. d. Wissensch., Bd. XLVII, Wien, 1883.

'

WARD.)

PREL'IMINARY REMARKS.

367

mate, and the doctrine of the descent of all plant forms from remote ancestors more or less unlike them may now be said to prevail, although few and feeble have been the attempts to indicate the character of the genetic relationships existing among living types. This general subject will be treated later, but it is mentioned here merely to show how it has naturally come about that botanists are now turning their attention
towards paleontology as the only source that holds out any promise to
them of even partial success in explaining the de,elopment of existing ·
floras. The effect of this can but be salutary, and paleobotany is likely
to gain as much as botany proper. Even should no success be attained in the direction sought both sciences will gain, since it will bring them
into more intimate relations and tend to blend them, as is natura], iuto one science. Hitherto, it must be confessed, they have been studied too independently. In fact, not .only have botanists as a rule ignored the existence of paleontology, but paleobotanists have generally gone on with their botanical classifications and discussions in total disregard of the elaborate systems of the former. Without comparing the results thus independently arrived at, it is safe to pronounce this entire method unwise and improper. To harmonize these results after so long a course of divergence will be a difficult task, and in the effort which is here made in this direction·complete success is neither claimed nor hoped for. But if the existing vegetation of ·the globe has descended
from its past vegetation, as alniost every botanist as well as paleontolo-
gist now assumes, what reason can exist for having two sets of clas~dfica ­ tion f The botanist is thus dependent upon paleontology for all his
knowledge of vegetal development and should listen closely to the voice
of the past and learn from it the true order in time in which the ancestors of each living type appeared on the earth. Every one must see "that this will be of the highest importance as a guide to classification,
and will supplement in the most effective manner the data furnis-hed by . t.he developed organs of living plants. ·We shall ultimately see that, .when rightly interpreted, these -two sources of proof, instead of conflicting, agree in a most instructive manner, rendering that system of classification which is in harmony with both classes' of facts in a high
degree probable and satisfactory. On the other hand, every candid paleobotanist must admit that he
can understand fossil plants only as they resemble living ones, and that the botanist, studying the perfect specimen with all its organs of reproduction as well as of nutrition, can alone declare with absolute certainty upon its identity or affinity. This mutual dependence of the two branches of botanical science upon each other is so apparent that it is certainly a matter of surprise that it has received so little recognition by scientific men.

368

SKETCH 0~"' PALEOBOTANY.

VII.-HISTORICAL REVIEW OF PALEOBOTANICAL DISCOVERY.

A.--BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

Paleobotany is a science of the nineteenth century. Nevertheless its

dawn at the beginning of this century was preceded by a long fading

twilight extending entirely through the eighteenth. But even when we

consider the nineteenth century alone, its progress shows us that it

has as yet scarcely entered into the full light of day. If we judge it by

its literature, not always a safe guide, but certainly the best one we

possess, we find that the first half of this century produced less than

one-fourth as much as the third quarter, and this less than the still un-

finished ' fourth quarter. If we measure the literature, as we may

roughly do, by the number of titles of books, memoirs, and papers that have been contributed to it, we will arrive at a rude co~ception. of' the

aceelerated rate at which the science is advancing.

Ignoring for the present certain vague allusions that were made to

the subject by the ancients and by writers down to the close of the

seventeenth cehtury, some hundred and fifty works might be named

belonging to the eighteenth century that bear in a more or less direct ·

.way upon vegetable fossils, but this would exhaust the enumeration.

A nearly equal number could be named which appeared during the first

quarter of the nineteenth century, while fully two hundred titles, includ-

ing many large works, issued from the press during the second quarter

of the century. And yet, as already shown, this was but the beginning,

and the true season of interest and activity did not set in until the sixth

decade, since which time this activity has steadily, if not uniformly,

increased until the present, when the number of works and minor

memoirs relating to fossil plants that see the light each y~ar often

reaches a hundred.

.

Although the number of persons who have interested themselves in

paleobotany and have published more or less upon it is very great, while

those who have become eminent ~n this field may be counted by scores,

still, if we confine ourselves to such only as may be called pre-eminent,

who have devoted their lives chiefly and successfully to it, and have

either constituted its true foupders or enriched in an especial manner

its literature and perfected its methods, we may restrict them to eight

or ten. If called upon to specify, we might reduce this enumeration to

the following great names which stand forth as the true leaders and

heroes of this science: Adolphe Theodore Brongniart, Heinrich Robert

Goppert, Franz Unger, Leo Lesquereux, Oswald Heer, Abramo Massa-

longo, Baron Constantin von Ettingshausen, and the Marquis Gaston

de Saporta. Whether we consider the number of works actually pro-

duced, the volume of this literature, the quality or importance of their

WARD.)

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

369

work, or the amount of painstaking labor devoted to the science, we find
that much more than half of all we possess of permauent vahte iu pa-
leobotany has emanated from the brm•ns, the bIands, and the pens of

these eight lifelong and laborious devotees of thJeir chosen science. It thus appears that the history of paleobotany must consist largely

in an account of the labors of a few persons, and had we nothing more

to offer than such an account, a fairly just concep,tion of its origin, progress, nature, and scope might be thus afforded. IBi1t it might be justly objected that~so limited an enumeration not only leaves out of the ac-

count some of the most imp(Jrtant works and mpst fertile workers, but

also fails to give the true relative importance to those ear1iest pioneers,

who, though they cannot be classed as the true ~ounders of the science,

nevertheless first pointed out, and then actually broke, the way to fu-

ture research and discovery. Let us then extend our list to cover these

two important classes, and we still find that th(imgh muclllonger than

before it is not so long as to be burdensome. By nearly trebling our

former number the selections may be so made ~hat, while not denying

great eminence

and

merit

to

many others,

•I
the !history of

discovery in

vegetable paleontology may be fairly represented. by the labors of about
twenty-two men. Abare enumeration ·of thes~ names in the order in

which they commenced to write would at least embrace the following:
1. Joha nn Jacob Sche u c hzer ·--.--· ---- ...• --·· ___ _ ~ --- j_ ---· ------- ----- ___ _1709
2. Ernst Friederich, Baron von Schlotheim .. __ . _. _. __ . ..... _.. _. . -- .... _.--- 1801
- 3. Kaspar Maria, Grafvon Sternberg .... -----· .......... ·--- . .. : ...... ·----· 1804 4. Adolphe Theodore Brongniart _. _.... _. _. _ .. _.... _.. _... -.- . . --- ... ----. -. - 18~2
5. Henry T. M. Witham ........ ---· .... ____ ·--------·--·- .................. - 1829 6. Heinrich Robert Goppert ..... _.. _____ . __ ... ____ . . __ . __ .. _. _. ___ . ___ .... -. 1834

7. August Joseph Corda .... · --------· .............. ---------· ... ···------· .. 1838 8. Hans Bruno Geinitz ....•..............••.. ____ . _... ,__ ........... -.- .. ---- 1839

9. Edward William Binney ............................................ ...... 1839
~~: ~~l::l~n~~~lj_~- S~hi~~~~:::: ::::::::~ ~ -_::::::: ::::~t::~: ~.·::~ ~ ·_ ~ ~ ~ ::: ~ ~:: !~!~
12. William Crawford Williamson ___ .. _. --· ....... _.. -- ~ ---- ... - .. ---- .. --.-- 1842
13. L eo Lesquereux ---· ....... . .....•.. ____ -- · · ·----- .. ,.••. -----· ·-- - -- · ----· 1845
14. Sir John William Dawson .... ---· ---- - --· ...................... ·----· ---· 1845
15. Oswald Heer . __ ........ _......... ___ .... _. _.. __ .. __ . _.. - . _..... - . .. . . . . . . 1846

16. Sir Charles James Fox Bunlmry .......................... .-..... .... .... .. 1846
17. Abramo Massalongo _____ .. __ .. ____________ . ____ .. _.J.__ ... __ .____ .. ___ .. .. 1850

18. Constantin, Freih e rr von Ettingshausen .. _. ___ .. __ .. __ ... __ .. . _- - ... -.--- 1850

19. John Strong Newberry _. . . . . . . . . . . . ____ . ___ . . . . _. . . . __ .. ···-- . . . . . --- . . -- 18G3

20. August Schenk ....••...............•................ --····--·· ........... 1858

21. Marquis Gaston de Saporta ..........................1....... -.............. 1860

t ·._. _... -... -- ... --.-22. William ~ar.ruthers ___ . _... __ ... ____ .. __ .. _.......

1865

From this hst are omitted the names of a consrderable number of the

younger active workers in this field whose thorough and successful work

has already placed from completed that

them in the front rank, bu
_its proper characterization

~~iwllhobseetocnagr~eteo rt hise

so fut

far ure

historian of the science.

GEOL 84--24

370 SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.
A ·brief biographical sketch including the mention of some of the
more important contributions of each of the above-named paleobotanists may now be made.
1. Scheuchzer.-Switzerland, which furnished one of the last and greatest of all the cultivators of this science who have now passed away, furnished also the first name that can with any true propriety be placed in the list of paleobotanists. .Although he wrote on many other subjects·, and worked in some very different fields, the paleontological works of Scbeuchzer are the only ones that possess any enduring Yalne, and although he did not confine his st~dies to vegetable fossils, he still gave ·these a much larger share of his attention th~n they now recci,·e from paleontologists in general, compared to that which is bestowed by them upon the other forms of extinct life. He was born at Zurich in 1672, and died in the same city in 1733. He trdveled quite extensively and made large collections of all kinds of curiosities, which he described and :figured in numerous works. He regarded all fossils as relics of the Noachian deluge, and gained a permanent place in the history of science by describing the bones of a gigantic salamander as "Homo diluvii testis." His most important work was his "Herbarium diluvianum," first published at Ziirich in 1709, but thoroughly revised and republished at Leyden in 1723. In this work man~T fossil plants_ are figured with sufficient accuracy for identification. Several of Scheuchzer's other works contain mention of fossil plants, particularly his "Museum diluvianum'' (1716), and his "Oryctographia helvetica" (in Part III of the "Helvetire historia naturalis," 1716-'18), but th eir value to the science, as indeed that of all his writings, is now chiefly historical. When, however, we consider that Scheuchzer antedated by almost a full century the earliest properly scientific treatises on paleobotany, we are prepared to overlook his deficiencies, and to regard him as the true precursor of the science.
2. Schlotheim.-Ernst Friedrich, Baron von Schlotheim, of Gotha, whose career began with the first years of the present century, is the second name that stands,out prominently in the history of paleobotany. Not that there bad not been many in the course of the long century which separates him from Scbeucbzer who had inter_ested themselves in the study of fossil plants, a nd who collectivel_y had accumula ted the data which rendered the work of Schlotheim l>Ossible, but to him is due the credit of first marshaling the evidence from vegetable remains in support of a true science of geology. A sketch of the early struggles and final triumph of s~rictly scientific principles as drawn from paleontology will presently be presented from the phytological side, and we may therefm:e content oursel\es here with.mentioning the grounds upon which Schlotheim's claims rest to a place in the present enumeration.
inBorn at .Almenhausen (Schwarzburg-Sondershausen) 1764, and
educated at Gottingen and Freibtirg, he took up the study of mineralogy

/

WARD.j

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

371

and metallurgy, which naturally led him into paleontology, for which he had a strong attachment. In 1801 he published .in Hoff's "Magazin" (I, pp. 76-95), at Leipzig, his "Abhandlung iiber die Krauter-Abdriicke im Schieferthon und S.andstein d~r Steinkohlen-Formation," a.nd in 1804 his '' Beschreibung merkwiirdiger Kraiiter-Abdriicke und Pflanzen-Versteinerungen, ein Beitrag zur Flora der Vorwelt" (I. Abtheilung), with fourteen plates, illustrating by accurately drawn :figures a large number of Carboniferous plants. In 1805 he was made councilor director and in 1820 president of the College Cameral of Saxe-Gotha, and in 1822 director of the Museum at Gotha. In 1820 he published at Gotha "Die Petrefactenknnde auf ihren jetztigen Standpunkt," the :first Heft of which really constitutes the second part (AbtheHung) of the work last mentioned, and the number of plates here reaches twenty-nine, all but the last two of which are devoted to fossil plants. The remainder of this work relates to animal remains, as does also all but Part III of the "Nachtrag" to tbe worl{, which appeared two years later.
These w·orks, though few in number, were systematic and conscientious, and constituted by far the most important contribution yet made to the knowledge of the primordial vegetation of the globe. They form the eaTliest strictly scientific record we have in paleobotany.
3. Sternberg.-Kaspar Maria, Graf von Sternberg, though contempo~ rnry with 8chlotheim, is mentioned after him in this enumeration, first, because his :first contribution to paleobotany3 was made three years later than Schlotheim's :first, and, secondly, because his great work on this
subject was not completed until after Schlotheim's works were all pub-
,lished and in his hands for use and criticism, and, in fact, not until after
Schlotheim's death.
Ste.rnberg was born at Regensburg in 1761 and died at Prague in 1838. He was an assiduous co11ector, not only of specimens but of books, and when in 1822 he was made president of the Bohemian National Museum he turned over to it all his collections, includi~g 4,000 volumes of rare works. His specialty was botany, on which he wrote many memoirs, but scattered through the different periodicals of the time are to be found some dozen papers relating to fossili)lants. The most important of a.U his works was his "Versuch einer geognostich.botanischen Darstellung der Flora der Vorwelt," which appeared in numbers from 1820 to 1838, and was translated into French Ly the Comte de 'Bray.4 To the eighth number, 1838~ was appended Corda's '' Skizzen zur vergleichenden Phytotomie vor- und jetztweltlicher Pflanzen." In this work that of all his predecessors, including Schlotheim, is reviewed, and conside.,rable progress made toward the correct interpretation of the record, so far .as then known; of vegetable paleontology.
3 Notice sur les analogues des plantes fossiles. Annales du Museum d'bistoire naturelle, 1804, Vol. V, pp. 462-470, pl. 31, 32.
4 Essai d'un expose geognostico-botanique de la flore du monde: primitif. Ra-tisbonne, 1820-1826, fol., 64 pl.

372 SKETCH OF -PALEOBOTANY.
4. Brongniart.-Schlotheim and Sternberg may be regarded as pioneers of the science of paleobotany. Brongniart is universally admitted to have been its true founder. The science may properly be said to have been born in 1828, the year in -which both the "Prodrome" and the "Histoire des vegetaux fossiles" appeared. It was these two works that gave it that powerful impetus which forced its immediate recognition and called into its service a large corps of colaborers with Brongniart, rapidly multiplying its literature and increasing the amount of material for its further study.
Adolphe Theodore Brongniart was born at Paris in 1801 and died in the same city in 1876. His father, Alexandre, was eminent in science, and the author of at least one memoir relating to fossil plants.5 Adolphe turned his attention early to botany and continued through life to de'\7ote himself to Hving plants; but his great specialty was the study of the extinct forms, and his labors in this :field extend through nearly half a century. His very first memoir, ''Sur la classification et la distribution des vegetaux fossiles en general, et sur ceux des terrains tie sediment superieur en particulier," which appeared in the "Memoires du Museum d'histoire naturelle de Paris" (pp; 203-240, 297-348) in 1822, was one of great merit and importance, as shadowing forth the comprehensive system which he was to elaborate. It ·was a decided improvement upon the classifications previously proposed by Sleinhauer, Stern~ berg, Martins, etc., and was later employed, with extensive modifications, in the '' ~rodrome." The great ., Bistoire," though pushed well into the second volume and enriched by nearly two hundred plates, was un.:" fortunately never finished, and has come down to us in this truncated condition. The causes which led to this result are understood to have been of a pecuniary character, and the author continued his investigatiovs and published his researches for many years chiefly in the "Annales des sciences· naturelles de Paris." - His next most important work, however, viz_., his" Tableau des genres de vegetaux fossiles," was published in the "Dictionnaire universel d'histoire naturelle" in 1849. The mere mention of these titles gives a very-inadequate idea of the importance of Brongniart's work. The systematic manner in which the science was organize(} and built up by him made him the highest authority on t,he subject of fossil plants, and the numerous more or less elaborate me- · moirs that continued to appear showed that none of the minor details were neglected. Of his reforms in botanical classification we shall have occasion later to speak more particularly.
5. Witham.-Henry T. M. Witham, of Edinburgh, was the first of aline of British investigators who looked beyond the external form of fossil plants and undertook the systematic study of their internal structure. It is for this reason rather than on accoup.t of the bulk of his works that his name is inserted in this enumeration. . He is well known for his de-
5 Notice sur des vegetaux fossiles traversant les couches d u ierr{llin houiller. Anuales des Mines, Tome VI, 1821, pp. 359-370.

WARD.)

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

373

scription of the great Carboniferous tree found in the quarries of Craigleith, and for other similar investigations. One of his principal works is entitled "The Internal Structure of Fossil Vegetables found in the Carboniferous and Oolitic Deposits of Great Britain, described and illustrated," Edinburgh, 1833. The illustrations are numerous and well executed, and form a secure basis for all subsequent researches of the kind.
6. Goppert.-Heinrich Robert Goppert, of Breslau, who was born in the year 1800 and who bas died since this sketch was first drafted, was the most voluminous writer upon fossil plants that bas been produced thus far. In his -" Literarische .Arbeiten," prepared by himself in 1881, one hundred distinct works, memoirs, and papers are enumerated relating to this subject, and several have appeared since. Nearly an equal number relate to living plants, and a few to medicine, which was his profession. But his work in vegetable paleontology exceeds by far all his other works in its value to science, embracing as it does many large treatises on the Paleozoic flora ("Flora der Uebergangsgebirge"), on the amber flora, on the fossil Coniferre, on the fossil ferns, etc. Especially important has been his microscopic work upon the structure of various kinds of fossil woods, particularly those of the Coniferre and the Dicotyledons. Endowed with the true German devotion to his specialty, with keen observing and analytic powers, with a restless activity, exceptional opportunities, and long life, he was able to create for the science a vast wealth of new facts and give it a solid body of laboriously wrought truth. If Brongniart laid the foundations of paleobotany, Goppert way properly be said to have built its superstructure. -Though born one year earlier than Brongniart, he did not turn his attention to fossil plants until the latter had been twelve years in that field. His first paper appeared in 1834, or just a half century ago.6 It was historical in its · character. Like many other men who have been destined for a great · career, he began it by taking a bird's-eye view of his subject. He did not despise the literature of his predecessors, even though they groped in the darkness of medieval ignorance. With patriotic pride he first told the story of his own countrymen's attempts to elucidate the flora of the ancie.nt world, although even in this paper, he by no means confined himself to the limits of Silesia, and two years later he published a great expansion of this historical research as an introduction to his first great work.7
No attempt within our present limits of space to convey an idea of the true merits of Goppert's services to paleobotany could hope to do them justice, and we can only point to the monument he has himself

6 Ueber die Bestrebungen der Schlesier die Flora der Vorwelt zu erHiutern. Schlesische ProvincialbUitter, August mid September 1834. Also in Karsten und Dechen's Arohiv, Band VIII, 1835, pp. 232-249;
7 Systema filicum fossilium: Die fossilen Farnkrauter. Nov. Act. Acad. Ores. Leop. Car., Tom. XVII, suppl., pp. 1-76.

374

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

reared, and .enroll his name alongside those of Brongniart, Unger, and Heer.
7. Gorda.-The propriety of placing Corda's name in this roll of honor may be questioned by some, but his contributions to paleobotany were important, and there can be no doubt that had his life not been prematurely .cut oft' they would have been far more so. Born in 1810 at Reichenberg, Bohemia, he early tu.rned his attention to botany, and especially to close histological investigations in fungology. Humboldt, attracted by his productions, called him to Berlin in 1829, aud Sternberg recalled him to Prague in 1834. His "Skizzen zur vergleichenden · Phytotomie," appended to Heft 8 of Sternberg's "Flora der Vorwelt," was a valuable addition to that work, and led the way to his two other principal works, "Beitrage zur. Flora der Vorwelt," Prague, 1845, and "Die fossilen Pflanzen der bohmischen Kreideformation '' (in Reuss'R "Versteinerungen der bohmischen Kreideformation "), Stuttgart, 1846. In these works and other of his memoirs a large number of species of fossil plants are named, described, and carefully figured, forming a permanent tribute to the growing science. In 1847 Prince Colloredo sent Corda to Texas to collect scientific material. He remained th('re two years, making large accumulations, and started back with thetn.,in the Bremen steamer Victoria, which was lost in the middle of the Atlant.ic, and Corda, with all his scientific treasures, went down with her.
8. Geinitz.-Only a comparatively small number of Geinitz's papers relate to paleobotany, and a still smaller number are devoted exclusive1y to that subject; and yet not less than thirty-five titles belong to this department of paleontology. Born at Altenburg in 1814, be bas stood for a full half century in the front rank of continental geologists, and still continues his indefatigable labors. His protracted studies into the age and character of the Quadersandstein formation of Germany, in which so many fossil plants have been found, have shed much light upon this difficult horizon, while his investigations in the Permian (Dyas, Zechstein), the Carboniferous, and the Graywacke have always led him to study and des~ribe the floras of these periods. We thus possess in his works a geological authenticity for very many fossil plants, which all paleobotanists know how to appreciate. His '' Oharacteristik der Schichten und Petrefakten des sacbs.-bohmischen Kreidegebirges," Dresden, 1839-42, appears to have been his first work relating to our subject, and his paleobotanical labors therefore date from 1839.
9. Binney.-If Witham deserved enumeration in our pre~ent list for founding the British school of what may be called phytopaleontological histologists, Binney must be admitted in recognition of the extent and importanc~ of .his researches in this department. H~ seems to have ·commenced publishing the results of his investigations in 1839,8 and

STbe first of his papers whose title appears in the" Royal Society Catalogue" is u On a Microscopic Vegetable Skeleton found in Peat near Gainsborough." British .Association Report, 1839 (Part II), pp. 71, 72.

WARD.)

BIOGRA~HICL\L SKETCHES

375

continued them without interruption to the end of his life. :ijis most important work, on the" Structure of Fossil Plants from the Carboniferous Strata," published by the Palreontographical Society of London, was commenced in 1868. Hi8 death took place in the year 1882.
10. Unger,....;_Franz Unger of Steiermark, who was born in 1800 and died in 1870, was one of the most illustrious of European botanists and paleontologists. His memoirs and books on paleobotany are on}y less numer.:ms than those of Goppert, and among them is an unusual1y large number of monographs of great value. His investigations were chiefly confined to the more recent formations, and his "Chloris protogrea," "Flora von Sotzka," "Iconographia plantarum fossilium," and" Sylloge plantarum fossilium" are worthy of speciaJ mention. His ''Synopsis p1antarum fossilium" and "Genera et species" are systematic attempts to compile the known <lata of the science in condensed and convenient form. His first paper 9 on the subject was published in 1840.
11. Schimper.-Although Schimper contributed a paper 10 on fossil plants as early as 1840, and was associated with Mougeot in preparing their important "Monographie des plantes fossiles du gres bigarre de la chaine des Vosges" in 1844, as also with Kochlin-Schlumberger in his "Terrain de transition des Vosges" in 1862, still, but for his great "Traite de paleontologie vegetale," the third volume of which appeared in 1874, it is evident that this eminent bryologist would not ha-ve been entitled to be also ranked among the great paleobotanists. The ''Trait€" is unquestionably the most important contribution yet made to the science. Although necessarily to a large degree a compilation of the work of others, still it is by no means wanting in originality, and contains a great amount of new matter. Its ehief merit, however, is in its conception and plan as a complete manual of systematic paleobotany. The classification is highly scientific and rational, awl the discussion of abstruse points in defense of it is acute and cogent. E-very species of fossil plant known to the author is described in Latin, and much independence is manifested ·in the rejection of synonyms. Very important is the geological classification at the _end of Volume III, showing that the author had clear i<leas of the uses of the science. The selections for the atlas are aiways the very best, and not a few of the figures are original. Although not in possession of all the extant data, particularly from America,u Schimper succeeded in stipplying in this work _the greatest need of paleobotany. His great talent as an organ-

9Ueber ein Lager vorweltlicher Pflanzen auf der Stangalpe. Steyermarkische Zeitschrift, Grat.z, 1840. I have only been able to consult this memoir in Leonhard & Bronn's Neue Jahrbiicher (1842, pp. 607, 608), which may not contain it in extenso.
JOBaumfarne, Schachtelhalme, Cycadeen, A.et.hophyllum, A.lbertia * * * im bunten
Sandstein der Vogesen; Hysterium auf einem Pappel-Blatte der W etterauer Braunkohle. Leonhard und Bronn's Neue Jahrbiicher, 1840, pp. 336-338. Communication dated 14. Marz 1840.
11 See ''The American Journal of Science," 3d series, Vol. XXVII (April.18S4), p. 296.

376

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

izer and text-book writer was again seen in his able contribution to Zittel's "Handbuch der Palaontologie."
Wilhelm Philip Schimper was born at Dosenheim (Alsace) in 1808, and died at Strasbourg, where most of his work had been done, in 1880. He became director of the Museum of National History-of Strasbourg in 1839.
12. Williamson.-ln Mr. W. C. Williamson we have a third of the line of eminent British paleobotanists, whose chief attention has been directed to the study of the internal structure of Carboniferous plants, and the one who at the present time unquestionably stands at the head of this school of investigators. If we include his paper "On the Origin of Coal," published in the report of the British Association for· 1842 (Part II, pp. 48, 49), his place would be where we have assigned him, but his special work upon the plants themselves seems not to have commenced until1851, and th~n to have been more or less interrupted until1868, since which tinie it has been incessant, culminating in his great work "On the Organization of the Fossil Plants of the Coal Measures," which runs through so 111anJ' volumes of tbe ''Philosophical Transactions." Of the merits of this work, ~s of all of this author's investigations, it is certainly unnecessary to speak here.
13. Lesquereux.-Mr. Leo Lesquereux of Columbus, Ohio, is one of those acquisitions which America has so often made at Europe's expense when political turmoils arise there and make liberty dearer even than country. He was of that little band, which also included Agassiz and Guyot, who were compelled to abandon Switzerland in 1847 and 1848, on the occasion of the breaking up of the Academy of Neuchatel and the coming into power of the so-called Liberal party. His ancient family name was Lescure, afterwards Lescurieux, and finally Lesquereux, and hJs immediate ancestors were French Huguenots. He was born November 18, 1806, at Fleurier, canton of :N euch atel. His father was a manufacturer of wat.ch springs and endeavored to te~ch him that business, though, since his health was somewhat delicate, his mother preferred to prepare him for the ministry; but Science had marked him for her own, and no power could withdraw him from nature. "Vith a taste for plants in general, he was led by circumstances first to the study of mosses, then naturally to that of peat, and lastly to that of fossil plants. The government of Neuchatel was then greatly interested in the protection of peat bogs on account of the difficulty of procuring fuel for. the poor, and offered a prize (a gold medal of 20 ducats) for the best memoir on the formation and preservation of peat. Lesquereux competed and won the prize. His prize memoir I:t gained a wide reputation, was extensively copied, and is still quoted as one of the.best on the subject.

12 Quelques recherches sur les marais tourbeux en general. Memoires de la Societe
des sciences naturellesde NeuchMeJ, Tome III, 1845. (See summary in the Archives des scit~nces phys. et nat. de Geneve, Tome VI, p. 154.)

J.

WARD.]

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. ·

377

The connecting link between this study and that of fossil plants was supplied two years later, when he wrote a short paper "Surles plantes . qui forment la houille.m3
On his arrival in America he studied the coal formations of Ohio, Pennsylva,nia, Illinois, Kentucky, Arkansas, and other States, and his reports appear in those of the geological surveys of aU of these States. Especially important are those upon the coal flora of Pennsylvania. The first of these appeared in the second volume of the report of H. D. Rogers, in 1858, consisting of some quite elaborate "General Remarks," and a '~Catalogue of the Fossil Plants which have been Named or Described from the Coal Measures of North America." This is accompanied by twenty-three excellent plates. But this was a mere beginning, for when the second geological survey of Pennsylvania was undertaken Mr. Lesquereux was employed to work up the coal flora, which appeared in 1880 in a Yoiume of text and an atlas, the most important work on carboniferous plants that bas been produced in America. A third volume, supplementary to these, has just been issued.
In 1868 Mr. Lesquereux began the study of the floras of later formations in the \Vest, and contributed an important paper on the Cretaceous leaves of Nebraska to the ''American Journal of Science." 14 Dr. F. V. Hayden employed him to work up the collections of bis surveys of the Territories, and important papers on the subject appeared in the annual reports of the survey for 1870, 1871, 1~72, 1873, and 1874. In the last of these years appeared his "Cretaceous Flora," forming Volume VI of the quarto reports. In 1878 the seventh volume of these quarto reports was published, a still larger work, devoted to what he called the "Tertiary Flora," though a very large proportion of the species were from the Laramie Group. The eighth of these volumes will also be by Mr. Lesquereux, and will consist of a thorough revision of the entire Cretaceous and Tertiary floras of North America. Mr. Lesquereux is still living, and though infirm with age is actively engaged in bryological and paleontological studies.
14. Da.wson.-To Sir J. W. Dawson is due the greater part of the knowledge we possess concerning thevegetablc paleontology of Canada and the British North American provinces in general. His :p.umerous papers, running back as far as 1845/5 are almost exclusively confined to the description and illustration of material from this part of the world, and all except a few recent one·s relate to -.the older formations of the East.

i3 Archives des sciences physiques et naturelles (Hibliotheque universelle), Tome VI, 1847, pp. 158-162. Geneve.
14 0n Some Cretaceous Fossil Plants from Nebraska. Am. Journ. Sci., 2d series, Vol. XLVI (July, 1861:5), pp. 91-105.
15 His paper "On the Newer Coal Formation of t.he Eastern Part of Nova Scotia" (Quart. Jouru. Geol Soc. Loud., Vol. I, 1845, pp. 322-330) merely names a few genera occurring there, but his "Notices of Some Fossils Found in the Coal Formation of Nova Scotia" (I. c., Vol. II, Ul46, pp. 132-136), giving his views on Sternbergia, attracted immediate attention.

378

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

His reports upon "The Fossil Plants of the Devonian and Upper Silu'· riari Formations of Canada," upon '·'The Fossil Plants of the Lower
Carboniferous and Millstone Grit Formations of Canada," and upon ''The Fossil Plants of the Erian (Devonian) and Upper Silurian Formations of Canada" are monographs of especial value. A geologist rather than a botani~t, he has done excellent service, not only in elucidating .the important problems of Acadian geology, but also in demonstrating the value and legitimacy of the evidence furnished by vegetable remains.
Dawson was born at Pictou, Nova Scotia, in the year 1820, and though educated at Edinburgh, he returned to his native country and has devoted his whole life to the study of its geology and paleontology. He :s a fellow of the Royal Society of London and of the Geological Society, and has long honored the well·known post of Principal of McGill University, Montreal. We learn with great satisfaction, though almost too late to be fittingly mentioned here, that the order of knighthood has just been conferred upon him on the occasion of the meeting of the British Association in his adopted city.
15. Heer.-The numerous obituary notices that have so recently appeared in all the scientific journals render it U:nnece~sary to give in this place any extended biographical sketch of this eminent savant. He was born at Glarus, Switzerland, in 1809, and died at Lausanne in 1883, after having long filled the chair of botany in the University of Zurich. Vegetable paleontologists note with some surprise that he is mentioned by his biographers chiefly as an entomologist,I6 and naturally wonder how great must have been his eminence in that department to overshadow his vast and invaluable labors in the domain of fossil pfants.
He commenced· writing upon this latter subject in 1846.17 The first volume of his great work, "Flora tertiaria Helvetire," appeared in 1855, the second in 1856, and the third in·1859. The exceedingly great care, accuracy, and thoroughness with which this chef d'muvreof science was executed, especially in the matter of illustration, is a marvel to comtemplate. Nothing comparable to it bad appeared before, and nothing equal to it bas appeared since. He became interested in the fossil floras of remote parts of the globe, and among the first of his memoirs on such subjects was one that may be found in the Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia for 1858 (pp. 265-266), on the "Fossil plants of the Lower Cretaceous beds of Kansas and Nebraska." He also figured the "Phyllites Cretac~es du Nebraska," collected by Marcou and Capellini.l8 In 1866 his memoirs upon the fossil floras of the Arctic regions commenced to appear, and to this fertile subject he devoted the greater part of the rest of his life. The firt:.t volttme of his ''Flora

I£"Science;" Vol. II, p. 583~, 1883; "Nature," Vol. XXVIII, Oct. 25,1883. 17 The first paper of which there is a record is the one "Ueber die von ibm an der hohen Rhone entdekten fossilen Pflanzen," which appeared in the Verhandlungen der Schweizerischen Gesellschaft for 1846, pp. 35-38. 18 Neue Denkschriften der Scbweizerischen Gesellschaft der Naturforscher, ZUrich, 1866. Mem. I.

WARD)

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

379

fossilis arctica" appeared in 1869, the second in 1871, and the remaining five at i~tervals of about two years, the seventh and last coming out in the year of the author's death. With the exception of the first volume, this colossal work com-ists entirely of a compilation of more or less independent memoirs, which were published as fast as prepared in vari.ous sc1ientific periodicals in several languages, and which.are merely put together into volumes of convenient thickness. Each memoir has its .own independent pagination, generally that of the volume of Transactions in which it originally appeared, all of which renders it very inconvenient for consultation, but cannot detract from its great value as a reservoir of facts.
Bunbury.-lt may be doubtful whether the paleobotanical works of Sir Charles Bunbury are of sufficient importance to entitle him to enumer.. .ation among the principal cultivators of that science, but they have certainly been quite numerous and covered a wide range of subjects, both geographically and botanically. He began by elaborating certain matenalfrom the United States19 and the British provinces,2° collected by Sir Charles Lyell and Dr. Dawson, and was the first to recognize the merits .of the views of the latter respecting the fossils known as Sternbergia from the coal fields of Sydney. But he also worked up material from France, Portugal, Madeira, and India, as well as from Yorkshire and other parts Df England. His investigations have. been chiefly confined to carbon'iferous fossils, but in a quite recent work 21 he has published some inter-esting views on the subject of nervation which may prove of value.
17. Massalongo.-Abrarno Massalongo, the first of the Italian school -of paleobotanists whose work claims our attention here, commenced publishing in, 1850,22 and continued with great activity until1861. He confined his investigations almost exclusively to material from his own -country, and contributed more to the elucidation of the fossil floras of Italy than any other author. The number of his papers is very large, -considering the comparatively short period during which be was perm itted to work, and an unusually large percentage of them are mono.graphs of considerable size. His greatest work, for which Scarabelli contributed the stratigraphical part, was his "Studii sulla flora fossile <e geologia stratigraphica del Senigalliese," Imola, 1859, but of which

l\J On some remarkable F ossil Ferns from Frostburg, Md., collected by Mr. LyelL ·Quart. Journ. Geol'. Soc., 1846, VoL II, pp. 82:---91. Observations on the Fossil Plants of the Coal Field of Tuscaloosa, .Ala., etc. Silliman'sJournal, 1846, pp. 228-233. Descrip.; tion of Fossil Plants from: the Coal Field near Richmond, Va., Quart. Journ.Geol. Soc., 1~47, Vol. III, pp. 281-288.
20 Notes on some Fossil Plants, communicated by Mr. Dawson, from Nova Scotia. ·Quart. J ourn. Geol. Soc., 1846, Vol. II, pp. 136-139. On Fossil Plants fJ;"om the Coal Formation of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia; Ibid., 1847, Vol. III., pp. . 433-428, and nu~ merou s similar memoirs.
21 Botanical Fragments. London, 1883. 22 See his Schizzo geognostico sulla Valle di Prog:Qo (fr~ludium Fl~r::e. fossilis Bol..censis), Verona, 1850. Collett. dell' Adige, 14 sett., 1850.

380

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

his "Synopsis :fiorre·fossilis Senogalliensis," Verona, 1858, forms an integral part, having been prepared from the plates of the former, to which reference is constantly made. This work is thoroughly illustrated by forty-five large quarto plates of well executed but not very well printed figures, and is one of the most important contributions to the Tertiary flora of Europe. It virtually and fittingly closed the too short but perhaps too active career of one of Italy's most talented scientists
18. Ettingshausen.-Since the death of Oswald Beer the great merits of Baron von Ettingshausen's paleobotanical researches, always highly appreciated, have seemed to command especial attention. Beginning· th_is career simultaneously with Massalongo in the year 1850,23 he has had the advantage over the Italian savant of being permitted to continue it uninterruptedly under the most favorable auspices down to the present time. ,He immediately began his studies in the Tertiary flora ofthe Austrian Monarchy, and published the Tertiary Flora of Vienna in 1851. His "Beitdige zur Flora der Vorwelt," "Proteaceen der Vorwelt," and numerous lesser papers appeared in the same year. From the number of important papers that appeared during 185~ and 185~ it is clear that he must have been very active, entering as he did into the study of Paleozoic and Mesozoic floras, as well as continuing his work on the Tertiary plants. It was, however, in 1854 that he laid the foundation for that deserved renown which he now enjoys i~ taking up under such extraordinarily favorable conditions the investigation of the true principles of nervation in dicotyledonous leaves. The process of natureprinting, or physiotypy (Naturselbstdruck), bad been invented in the Austrian imperial court and state printing-office by Auer and W orring, and Ettingsbausen at once perceived its special applicability to the science of botany. Recognizing the vast importance of this discovery to paleobotany he obtained permission to employ the new method and proceeded to prepare his :first monograph "Ueber die Nervation der Blatter und blattartigen Organe bei den Euphorbiaceen mit besonderer Riicksicht auf die vorweltlicben Formen," 24 which he followed up with a similar memoir, " Ueber die ::Nervation der BHitter d~r Papilionaceen.25 To the :first of these memoirs ·was prefixed a brief s~·nopsis of the classes of nervation found in eupborbiaceous leaves. Availing himself of the efforts in this direction which had been previously made by Leopold von Bucbr Bianconi,27 and others (he seems

23 No less than four of his papers appeared in that year, one in the Sitzungsberichte of the Vienna Academy, one in the first volume of the Austrian Geological .Jahrbucb, and two in the sixth volume of Haidinger's Collections of Memoirs.
24 Sitzungsberichte d. Akad. d.· Wis~. Wien. Bd. XII, 1854, pp. 138-154, Pl. I-XVII. 2s Loc. cit., pp, 600-663, Pl. I-XXII. 26Ueber die Blattnerven und ihre Vertheilung.. Monatsbericht der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaft, 1852, pp. 4~-49, with plate. 21 Giuseppe G. Bianconi. Sul sistema vascolare delle foglie, considerato come carattere Mstinti.vo per la determinazione delle filliti. N. Ann. d. Sc. Nat. Bologna, 1838, A.nn.· I, Tom. I, pp. 343-~90, Pl. VII-XIII.

WARD.]

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

381

not to have been acquainted with De Candolle's ''Organogenic"), he proposed a classification and terminology, which, so far as they went, Heer was willing to adopt,28 and which are in common use by paleobotanists at the present time. In 1855 Ettingshausen and Pokorny recehrecl instructions to prepare a work for the Paris Exposition to be held in 1867 that should thoroughly illustrate the application of the nature-printing process to the science of botany. The result was that immense and astonishing production entitled "Physiotypia plantarum Austriacarum," with its six enormous volumes of most exquisite plates, not only illustrating the leaves of the trees and shrubs, the flowers with their petals, sepals, stamens, and pistils, but the entire plants wherever within the ample limits of size, and these stand forth from the plates in actual relief like a veritable hortus siccus. This grand success was followed up by various monographs upon the nervation of certain important orders, as the Celastrinere, Born bacere, Graminere, etc. Aided further by this magic process he commenced in 1858 23 a series of works illustrating the skeletons only of leaves, the mo_st important of whicn is his "Blattskelette der Dykotyledonen.," which appeared in 1861. The way thus cleared for the successful study of the Tertiary floras of the world, Ettingshausen, from this time on, has continued his important investigations in this field, and each year our knowledge of fossil plants is increased and extt>nded by his enlightened contribution~. It would carry us quite beyond our 1imits to attempt an eumeration here even of the most important of _these memoirs, but • we cannot complete our brief sketch of Ettingshausen's. invaluable labors without a passing reference to such productions as his Flora of the Tertiary basin of Bilin, his Cretaceous Flora of Niederschona, his Floras of Wetterau, Steiermark, Radoboj, Sagor, etc. Coupled with his great powers of accurate observation and strictly scientific method of investigation, Ettingshausen displays an unusually broad grasp of the deeper problems which paleobotany presents and has undoubtedly been for many yea.rs far in advance of all his contemporaries in this field in correctly apprehending and announcing the true laws of phytochorology and plant de\elopment.
Baron von Ettingshausen was born in 1826 at Vienna, and is a member of many learned societies and scientific bodies.
19. Newberry.-Dr. John Strong Newberry, of the School of Mines, Columbia College, New York, one of the most eminent American geologists, was born at New Windsor, Conn., December 22, 1822, and graduated at Western Reserve College in 1846. Two years later he took the degree of M. D. from Cleveland :Medical College, Ohio. Before commencing the practice of his profession at Cleveland, in 1851, he spent two years in Europe. On his return opportunities soon presented them-

2~Flora Tertiaria Helvetim, Band II, pp. 2-6. ~9The first was his "Blattskelette der Apetalen," Wiener Denkschriften, Band XV, 185~, pp. 181-272, with fifty-one plates.

382

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

selves for joining parties of exploration in the farWest, and be finally
abecame a member of the celebrated Ives Exploring Expedition. With
a special fondness for geology and mining be combined deep interestin paleontology, in all of which specialties he has distinguished himself.. The Carboniferous formation of Ohio bad early interested him much, · and especially the Yegetable remains found embedded in it, and as far ba~k as 1853 we find him reading papers before the American Association, ''On the structure and affinities of certain fossil plants of the Carboniferous era," and'' On the Carboniferous Flora of Ohio, with descriptions of fifty new species of fossil plants." 30 In 1859 he reported upon the fossils, including plants, of the :Macomb Exploring Expedition,31 in 1861 those of Lieutenant Ives's Expedition,32 and in 1863, those of the Northwest Boundary Commission. 33 Probably the most important of his paleobotanical memoirs thus far published was his "Notes on the I~ater Extinct Floras of North America," which appeared in the Annal~ of the New York Lyceum of Natural History for April, 1868. No plates accompanied t4is memoir, but a large number of the plants described had been figured by Dr. Newberry, which he bad expected to be published by the. Geological Survey of the Territories, but none appeared until 1878. 34 He has, however, been more or less constantly engaged since that time in figuring the large collections which have been reaching him each year at the School of Mines, and over 'one hundred plates have, up to the present writing, been prepared, most of which are printed and awaiting the text of a large work which will be published by the United States Geological Survey.
20. ·Schenk.-Hofrath Dr. August Schenk, professor of botany at the University of Leipsic, was born at Hallein, Upper Austria, in 1815, and held the chair of botany at Munich and Wiirzbach before being called to that of Leipsic. His paleobotanical researches have been chiefly directed towards a little known horizon lying between the Bnntersandstein and the Lias, and upon this dark region ~bey have shed a flood of light. His earlier papers 35 related to fossil pl~nts from the Keuper, chiefly collected in the vicinity of Bamberg and Bayreuth, and, in addition to material collected by himself and Dr. Kirchner, he elaborated that brought together by the Count of MUnster, but later he turned his attention to' some rich plant beds overlying these strata and situated intermediate between them and the Lias. It is upon this narrow horizon

30Proceedings, pp. 1[)7-166.

31 Report of the Expedilion, pp. 142-148, Pl. IV-VIII.

32 Reportupon the Colorado River of the West, by Lieut. Joseph C. Ives, Washington,

1861, pp. 129-13'2., Pl. III.

.

33 Boston Journal ofNatural History, Vol. VII, 1863, pp. 506-524.

34 Illustrations of Cretaceous and Tertiary plants. Washington, Government Printing

Office, U:l78.

35 The earliest~ seems to have been "Ueber einem in der Keuperformation bei Wtirz-

burg aufgefundenen fossilen Farnstamm (Chelepteris strongylopeltis). Verhandlun-

gen der Wtirzburger physicalisch-medicinschen Gesellschaft, Ball(l VIII, 1858, pp.

212-216.

,

WARD,]

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.

383

that lle llas bestowed tile closest attention, and his final monograph
upon the subject, which, dropping the term Rhetic, he has entitled •' Die
fossile Flora der Grenzscllicbten des Keupers und Lias Frankens," is a very Yaluable contribution to paleobotany. Still later (1868), be took up the Musch elkalk beds of Recoaro, first noticed by Catullo,36 but treated by a number of authors, and produced a finely illustrated little work "Ueber die Pflanzenreste des Muschelkalkes von Recoaro." Besides his "Beitrage zar l 1'lora der Vorwelt" in the Palmontographica, and numerous minor contributions, Dr. Schenk has elaborated the fossil plants for Baron Richthofen's "Ohina,1137 and, sincA Schimper's death,
has gone on with the vegetable department of Zittel's '' Bandbuch der PaUiontologie.1738
21. Sapm·ta.-The death of Professor Heer broke up the illustrious trio of continental paleobotanists who had so long taken the lead in the study of the fossil plants of the Tertiary f@rmation-Heer, Ettingshausen, and Saporta. The two that remain are of more nearly the same age, and in many respects admit of a more ready comparison; still their fields of labor are so well separated that no conflict can occur in their
operations, and both seem likely to continue uninterrupted for many years .their already extensive investigations.
The Marquis (until a year ago Count) Gaston de Saporta, was born in the ;rear 1823 at Saint Zacbarie, department of Var, in Provence, France, and it was in the near vicinity of his native place that be first began39 his paleobotanical studies, and to the thorough illustration of the fossil botany of ProYence he bas always devoted his best energies.
His "Etudes sur la vegetation du sud-est de la France al'epoque terti-
aire,"40 begun in 1863, bas thus far remained his ckf'f d're'uvrc, and most of the localities treated in this work are situated in Proyence. In 1873 he published" La revision de la fl.ore -fossile des gJpses d'Aix," which was practically a revision of the "Etudes.1141 .A. mong his other more important works on Cenozoic floras may be mentioned his ''Prodrome d'une flore fossile des trayertins de Sezanne,''42 in which the flora of the Eocene, or Paleocene, as be terms it, is better set forth than in any other
work, and his "Essai sur l'etat de la v.egetation a.l'epoque des marnes

36Nuovi annali di scienzi natur. di Bologna, serie II, Tom. V. 1~46, pp. 81-107 (see p. 106).
37 Band IV, pp. 209-269, 284-288, Pl. XXX-LIV. :Js II. Band, III. Liefernng. 3~ Note ·sur les plantes fQssiles de la Provence, Lausanne. Bull etin de la Societ e vaudoise des sciences naturelles, Tome VI, 1$ti0, pp. 505-514. Examen analytique des floreRtertiaires de Pi·ovence, Ziirirh, 1861. 40 Ann ales des sciences na.ti1felles-Botanique-4e serie, tomes XVl XVII, XIX ; 5e se rie, Tomes III, IV, VIII, IX, 1661-'68. • 41 Loc. cit., 5e serie, Tome XVIII. 42 Memoires de la Societe geologique de France, Tome VIII, 1865, pp. 289-438, Pl. XXII--XXXVI.

•

384:

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

heersiennes de Gelinden,"43 in which, as in his" Recherches sur les vegetaux fossiles de Meximieux,1744 he was assisted by Prof. A. F. Marion. But Saporta's contributions do not all relate to the Tertiary. Of nearly equal importance have been his studies in the Jurassic flora of ~~ranee.
The three volumes of his "Plantes jurassiques,"45 which have already appeared, with accompanying atlas, constitute, without any doubt, the most exhaustive treatise upon the vegetable paleontology of that horizon that has thus far been produced. Its value is by no means confined to the light it throws upon the Mesozoic flora of France. The manner in which the determinations are supported by comparison with other fossil and ·with living floras, renders the work a thoroughly general one. Indeed no better treatise exists on the histology of coniferous stems and on the cla8sifications of the Coniferm in general than is to be found in the introduction to the third volum·e of this work. Besides numerous other minor descriptive papers and memoirs of greater or less length and importance on fossil plants, Marquis Saporta has written two interesting popular books on the subject. That entitled "Le Monde des Plantes avant !'apparition de l'homme," which appeared in 1879, is unquestimiably the best popular treatise in this branch of science. The first volume of the work on "L'evolution du regne vegetal," confined entirely to a study of the Cryptogams from the point of view of evolution, appeared in 1~81 as one of the International Scientific Series, though it see~s never to have been translated into English. In this work Professor Marion was associated. Other volumes showing the evidence of phenogamous plants for the doctrine of evolution are anxiously looked for. Saporta has long been a strong supporter of this class of views, and his writings display a broad and enlightened spirit.
22. Oarruthers.-The subject of this sketch was born at Moffat, Scotland, and educated in Edinburgh. In 1859 he entered t.he British Museum as assistant in botany, and became keeper of the department of botany in 1871. He began his paleobotanical work by re-editing Lindley and Hutton's "Fossil Flor~ of Great Britain," and is understood to be now preparill g a supplement to it. During this time he has been constantly contributing articles upon various points connected with his investigations. The number of such papers is very large and their merit so great that his title to a place in the present enumeration will not probably be disputed. Although pursuing somewhat the same line of investigation as the other British paleobotanists, he still has given himself a much wider field. He has not limited his researches to the Paleozoic, but has made incursions into the Mesozoic and even into the Tertiary. Fossil fruits have formed a favorite study for him, and his investigations have widely

43 Memoires couronnes de 1'Academie des sciences de Belgique, Bruxelles, 4e edition, Tome XXXVII, No. 6, 1873.
44 Archives du Museum d'histoire naturelle de Lyon, 4e livraisou, 1876, p. 131. 45 Paleontologie franQaise. Serie 2. Vegetaux, 1873, 1S75, and 1876-1883.

. WARD )

EARLY HISTORY OF PALEOBOTANY.

385

expanded this field of knowledge. Mr. Carruthers was elected a fellow
of the Royal Society in 187.1.
In terminating this enumeration here it is evident that the limit of space and not of matter has been the motive. The aim has been rather to consider the great names in the past history of the science than to venture an estimate of the worth of present workers in it, and if anumber of living representatives have been named it is because their services have already been so great as to have given a special color to that history and to afford a safe basis for judging of their future work. With most of the many present devotees of paleobotany tbis last condition at least does not exist, and the fear of co~ing far short of doing them justice, at least in the estimation of their future biographers, bas detPrred me from introducing their names into this brief resume.
But aside from this cJass no little difficulty has been encountered in choosing from among the older workers, and although in many cases no two would agree where the line should be drawn, it is by no means improbable that some obvious mistakes have been made, and that names which have been omitted should have be~n substituted for some that have be~n mentioned. Defects of this Class, and also those of various other kinds, may, however, be partially remedied in the treatment af the next division of the subject, in which the field will be less restrict( in this respect, and we shall look more especially to the work done th an to t he men who have done it.

B.-SKETCH OF THE EARLY HISTORY AND SUBSEQUENT PROGRESS
OF PALEOBOTANY.
1. THE PRE-SCIENTIFHJ PERIOD.
Science often has its origin in wonder at unexplained phenomena, and
the re i s no science of which this is more true than of paleontology.
Nearly all the early writers openly avow that they have been chiefly spurred on to undertake and carry on their investigations by an ''eager cnriositym6 respecting the objects they were treating, and the first collections of such objects were looked upon simply as curiosities, while what have since become the greatest scientific institutions in the world sometimes betray their origin by perpetuating the original names · expressive of their sense of wonder.47
No greater objects of wonder have presented themselves to man's ·consideration than the fossils which from the earliest times have been observed in different parts of the earth's ernst. The efforts of the rational mind to interpret these phenomena, although they may seem amusing to the unthinking, are really of deep philosophic and even scientific interest. It may surprise some to learn that the conclusions
46 P a rkinson's Organic Remains of ·a Former World, 1804, p. v . 47For example the great Academia Cresarea Leopoldino-Carolina Naturre Curiosorum, found ed in 1670 at Frankfort-on-the-Main.
GEOL 84--25

386

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

reached by the ancients were far more correct than those drawn twelve to sixteen centuries later, from much more ample data. Strabo, Xenophanes, Xanthus, .Eratosthenes, and even Herodotus believed that the fossil shells they had seen once contained living animals, and that in process of time they had been turned into stone. They further concluded that the mountains in which they were found imbedded were once under the sea. These doctrines were known to the Romans, and of their popular acceptance by the cultivated classes we have evidence in the familiar lines of Ovid's " Metamorphosis." 48 This view was also shared by Pliny and other post-Augustan writers, and even Tertullian49 did not perceive its inconsistency with Ohristianphilosophy,whichcaused its complete rejection during the next thirteen centuries. Of the fact of this long stagnation not only in this but in nearly all other depart-
ments of science there is no question,5° but as to its cause there are dif-
ferences of opinion which this is not the place to discuss. The doubtless charitable attempt, however, to throw the responsibility back upon .Aristotle and his famous doctrine of generatio mquivoca,M merely because that doctrine was found more in harmony with the cosmogony which becam~ ingrafted upon those sombre ages, should, in the single interest of historic truth, be condemned, while it is too late in the scientific epoch to make it either necessary or prudent to hesitate in confessing that the reasoning powers of man were virtually destroyed during that period by the almost universal and thoroughly honest acceptance of a false cosmogony.52

48 "Vidi ego, quod fuerat quondam solidissima tellus

Esse fretum, vidi factas ex requore ter·ras,

Et procul a pelago conchre jacuere marinre,

Et vetus inventa est in montibus ancora snmmis."

(Lib. XV, 262.)

49 "Mutavit et totus orbis aliquando, aquis omnibus obsitus; adhuc maris conchre et

lmccinre perigrinantur in montibus, cupientes Platoni probare etiam ardua fluitasse."

(De Pallio, n:)

r

50 "During the next thirteen or fourteen centuries fossil remains of animals and

plants seem to have attracted so little attention that few references are made to them

b'y writers of this period. During these ages of darkness all departments of knowl-

edge suffered alike, and feeble repetitions of ideas derived from the ancients seem to

have been about the only contrilmtions of that period to natural science." (Address

of Prof. 0. C. Marsh as president of the American Association for the Advancement

of Science, 1879. •' Proceedings,'' Vol. XXVIII, p. 4.)

51 " In den darauf folgenden Zeiten verdrangte die aristotelische nnd nachherige

scholastiche Philosophic die Naturkunde, wobei man natlirlich auch die Petrefakten

fast ganzlich vernachlassigte und sie fast nur erwahnte, urn die ungegriindete Lehre

des Aristoteles von der genemtio roq-uivoca alsbald auch auf sie anzuwenden." (Gop-

pert, Systema Filicum Fossilium, p. 4.)
5~ " Cette science eu t beaucoup plus de peine a se developper que les autres sciences

naturelles, telles que la physique et la chimie, car elle rencontra tout d'abord nne op-

position religieuse qui en entrava longtemps lcs progres. L'ortbodoxie biblique craig-

nant que la science ne s'ecartlit trop des traditions de laGenese, interdisait aux savants

l'etude independante des fossiles, dans lesqneles elle ne voyait que les debris des etres
.anciens detruits par le deluge de Noe." (Schimper, Traite de paieoi:.tologie vegetale,

Tome I, p. 6.)

/ W.ARD.)

IGNORANCE OF THE ANCIENTS.

387

It is only in so far as they relate to fossil plants that these general
consiQerations can be entered into here, although so closely are all branches of paleontology blended in those early and, as it were, undifferentiated stages of their historical development that too strict a construction of this rule might exclude matter which has an important bearing upon paleobotany. The special science, however, must be reg~rded as very much younger than the general one. Indeed, while there is no doubt that the ancients we!'e familiar with several kinds of animal fossils, particularly shells and corals, it is generally believed that they were wholly unacquainted with any form of vegetable petrifaction.53 This complete ignorance seems to have continued throughout the middle ages down to the thirteenth century.
It is certainly surprising that so common an object as a piece of petrified wood should never have been observed by intelligent people inhabiting limestone regions like those of Greece and Italy, and it is hard to believe that this was really the case. It is more reasonable to suppose that such things were sometimes seen and wondered at by rustics, but that for some reason they escaped being recorded; or they may have been recorded in some work that has failed to come down to us, like the two lost books of Theophrastus.

53 " D'empreintes vegetales ou de debris vegetaux petrifies, nulle mention chez les anciens." (Scbimper, Zoe. cit., p. 1. See also Brongniart, Histoire des vegetaux fossiles, Tome I, p. 1 ; Sprengel, Qommentatio de Psarolithis, p. 7; Goppert, Syst. Fil. Foss., p. 8.)
The following are among the passages most commonly quoted in support of the opposite view :
"Palmati [lapides] circa Mundam in Hispania, ubi Cresar dictator Pompeium vicit, quoties fregeris." (To the word "palmati" is attached th.e following foot-note: " Qui palmre intus ofracti referant.") (Plinius, Nat. llist., XXXVI, 29. Delpbin Classics, 111, Pliny, 9, p. 4749.)
"In Ciconum flumine, et in Piceno lacu Velino lignum deiectum, lapideo cortice obducitur, et in Surio Colchidis flumine, adeo ut lapidem plerumque durans adhuc integat cortex. Similiter in Silaro, ultra Surrentum, non virgulta modo immersa, verum et folia lapidescunt, alias salubri potu ejus aqure. In exitu paludis Reatinre saxum crescit." (Loc. cit., II, 106.)
'' Syringitis stipulre, internodio similis, perpetua fistula cavatnr." (Loc. cit., XXXVII, 67.)
"Qui navigavere in Indos Alexandri milites frondem marinarum arborum tradidere in aqua viridem fuisse, exemptam sole protinus in salem arescentem. Juncos [truncos] quoque lapideos perquam similes veris per littora," etc. (Theophrastus, loc. cit., XIII, 51.)
"Quarti generis elatiten vocari quamdiu crudus sit: coctum vero militen, utilem. ambustis; ad omnia utiliorem rubrica." (Loc. cit., XXXVI, 38.)
'' Dryites e truncis arborum : hrec et ligni modo ardet." (Loc. cit., XXXVII, 73.) Consult also, Theophrastus, Hepz AzOror, Sect. XXIX; Strabo, Geographica, Lib. XVI ; and Pausanias, Grrecire Descriptio, Lib. I, cap. 43. All these passages have, however, been carefully studied, and the conclusion reached that they refer only to stones resembling trunks, fruits, etc., to madrepores, to incrustations, or other mineral substances, and not in any case to real petrifactions.

388

SKE. TCH OF PALEO.BOTANY.

Brongniart has o:ftered an apology for the ancients,54 on the ground that no coal mines occur in Greece or Rome, and that Spain, Northern Africa, and Western Asia, with which alone they were acquainted, are au ·equally wanting in that formation; and he very truly remarks that the knowledge of fcssil plants really began simultaneously with the use of coal, as the destruction of the forests of Western and Northern Europe forced the growing population to discover some substitute for wood as fuel. This is quite t:rue so far as coal plants are concerned, and somewhat so for all those fossils which are only exposed by mining, yet when we consider the extensive public works that were carried on by the Romans, in connection with the large number of rich beds of fossil plants now known in Italy, Dalmatia, Eubrea, and with the petrified forests of northern Egypt and other countries of the Roman Empire, some other explanation is certainly needed to account for the silence of ancient literature upon the subject. This is to be found in the highly artificial character of their civilization, and the little interest taken in or attention paid to the phenomena of nature around them. This state of society can be easily imagined by eliminating from our own society the very minute fraction of the citizens of any modern country who ever observe or reflect upon natural objects or phenomena. In any large city these can almost be counted upon the fingers, and this could then be done for the whole Roman Empire, while during the succeeding ages even these few were wanting, and the flicker that Pliny kindled upon the dying -embers of Grecian learning was allowed to go entirely out.
It was long supposed that Agricola 55 was the first to make unequivocal mention of petrified wood, but a passage has been found in Albertus Magnus 56 which leaves no doubt that his attention had been definitely drawn to this subject, and which carries it back to the thirteenth century. This passage, however, seems to have attracted no attention, and it was only after Agricola had twice 57 expressed his views on the
I subject that other writers took it up. Matthiolus in his letter to Bauh· _j156!) and Gesner58 (15651,~cribed specimens which came into their possession. A long discussion followed as to the true nature of these petrifact\ons and all kinds of theories were put forward. Already for

M Histoire des vegetaux fossiles, Tome I, p. 1.

55 Georgius Bauer Agricola. De natura fossilium, 1558, Lib. VII, pp. 324, 328.

56 " Similiter autem ligna jacentia in quibusda.m aquis et maribus convertunt in

lapides et retinent figuram lignorum. Et aliquando nat~:e plant~:e in aquis et mari-

bus illis ita sunt vicin~:e lapidum naturis quod ad modicum exiccat~:e in aere, lapi-

durn formam assumunt," etc. (Beati Alberti Magni De mineralibus. Tractatus L

Caput VII. Opera, Tom. II, p. 216, Lugduni, 1651.)

'

57 " De ortu et causis subterraneornm: Lib. III. In De re metallica, Basile~:e, 1657,

p. 507. Arbores * * * lapidescunt · * * * tum sic in saxa commutat~:e, ut

suus ctijuscunque; truncus et rami mox sub aspectum veniant: cortex a ligno non

difficiliter internoscantur."

·

58 Conrad Gesner: De rerum fossiliuUt, lapidum, et gemmarum maxime figuris et

similitudinibus. Tiguri, 1565. (See cap. ix, fol. 125, f. 1.)

WARD.)

KNOWLEDGE OF THE MIDDLE AGES.

- 389

centuries had the discussion of petrifactions in general been raging and the discovery of petrified wood only added new complications to an old controversy. Enlarging upon Aristotle's doctrine of spontaneous generatiou, the scholastic writers bad affirmed that it was as possible .for. stones of any required form to produce themselves as for living animals and plants. Avicenna in the tenth century had proposed his vis lapidijica. and Albertus Magnus in the thirteenth his virtus formativa. Bauhin 59 predicated a spirit of the Universe, or Archams, while l.Jibavius 60 held that fossils sprang, like living things, from a true germ or seed. Balthasar Klein obtained a specimen, one side of which was stone, the other coal, and this excited intense curiosity. He sent the specimen to Matthiolus, who studied it and came to the conclusion 61 that, coal was the third or final step in the process of transmutation, and that just as wood turned into stone so stone in turn was transformed into coal. Klein's own views were much more rational. The discovery ( in the mines of J oachimsthal of a petrified trunk with the bark on added to the inter~roused on this subject and kept alive the · discussion.
Thus far only petrified wood bad been observed or considered, and although Johannes Kentmann,62 in 1565, had given an account of some leaf impressions formed by incrustations of tufa, no mention of the remains of the foliar organs of plants in anytrue rock formation seems to have been made until1664, when Johann Daniel Major published at J ena his "Lithologia curiosa, sive de animalibus et plantis in Iapides versis.'" This work was so little known that,whatever its merits it attr.acted no notice, and the subject of fossil plants in the sense now commonly understood remained practically untouched until the close of the seventeenth century.
In 1699 appeared at London Lhwyd's '' Lithophylacii britanmei Ichn<;>graphia," 63 in which were not ·only described but figured with sufficient fidelity for identification a number of ferns from t:he coal measures of England. A period of great activity in this department of human observation, we can scarcely say science, followed the appearance of this work, but before attempting to follow the development from this point we may pause a moment to consider the history and progress of ideas which in all ages so largely formed the spur to observation and investigation.
Wlth the discovery of fossilized leaves and fronds by Major and Lh wyd all the departments of paleontology had been opened to dis. cussion, and in those early days discussi<?n was the primary consid-
59 De fontibus et balneis Bollensis. 60 Hist. et invest. font. medic. ad Tubarin snb Rotembergo. P. III, Franc. ad Mrennm. oi Epistolre ad Bauhin, III, pp . 141, 142, 1564. 62 Nomenclatura rerum fossilium , etc. Tit. vi, Lapides. Tiguri, 1565, fol. 38. 63 Eduardi Luidii Lithophylacii britannici ichnographia, sive lapidum aliorumque fossilium britannicorum singulari :figura lnsigniurn if if * distributio classica. Londini et Lipsire, 1699. 8°. (See Tab. 4 & 5, Figs. 184a, 186, 188, 189, 190, 191,197; see, a\so, two Annularias, F1.gs.~:201 ·& 202, Tab. 5.)

390

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

eration. The end was then, as now with modern science, the ascertain-

ment of truth, but the lesson had not yet heen learned that to this end

the accumulation and investigation of facts is the first and principal

requisite.
The mysti.c views of 4-vicenna, Alb~rtus, Bauhin, Matthiolus, and

.. Libavius, already referred to, prevailed in varying forms throughout the seventeenth century. Sperling 64 (1657) advocated a stone-making

spirit, or aura seminalis. Kircher 65 (1665) propounded his theory of

semiooria of corpuscula, salina, as the true principle of petrifaction, and

as r ea1ly constituting the vis lapidijica or spiritus architectonicus which

controls the action of the succus petri.ficus, or petrifying juice, in which

be was followed more or less closely by Lachmund Gb (1669), Plot 67 (1677),

R.hin 68 (1682), and Lhwyd 69 (1699), while others considered fossils as

mere· freaks of nature. Indeed, Oamerarius 70 (1712) declared that in

the beginning God had -supplied these varied forms to the earth's inte-

rior the same as grass and herbage to its surface. This class of ideas,

however, could with difficulty withstand the light of the accumulating

facts after the commencement of the eighteenth century~ and Lange's 71

attempt (1708) to demonstrate the germ theory proved one of the latest

efi'orts of the kind. A modified Democritism, however, cropped out

later, as seen in Dr. ·Arnold's (1733) investigation of the origin and

formation of fossils, in which he postulated the existence of infinitesi-

mal particles which were brought together in the creation of the world

to form the outline of all the creatures and objects UlJOn and within the

earth, a work which found some favor on the continent and was trans-

lated into German in 17.33.72

The theory which was destined to supplant these vague, unreal spec-

. ulations an(l to prevail throughout the eighteenth century was what

may be called the flood theory, viz., the idea that all or nearly all fos-

sils consist of the debris of the life ofthe globe prior to the occurrence

of the Noachian deluge, having been tossed and washed ·about in that

great disturbance and then left stranded on or near the surface in the

places where they now occur after the waters had retreated. This view

may seem to us a poor substitute even for the worthless dreams which

.1

64 John Sperling. . Lithologia, quam sub prreside viri, ete., examini submittit G.

E. Wiegandus. Viteb., 1657.

6n Athanasius Kircherus. Mundus subterraneus, Tom. II, Lib. VIII, Sect. I, Cap.

III; Sect. II, Cap. I. Amsterdam, 1665.

•

66 Friederich Lachmund. Oryctographia Hildesheimensis. Hildesheim, 1669.

6iRobert Plot. Natural History of Oxfordshire, pp. 32, 33, 122, 124. Oxford, 1677.

G~ Lucas Rhin. Dissertatio de ebore fossili. Altdorf, 1682.

69 Edward Lhwyd. Loc. cit

·

70Elias Camerarius. · Dissertationes taurinenses ph~' sico-medicre, Francf., 1712.

71 Carolus Nicolaus Langius. Historia lapidium figttratorum Helvetire, p. 165.

Venetiis, 1708. · 40,

72Theodore Arnold. Eine Untersuchung des Ursprungs und der Formirung derer

Fossilien. Leipzig, 17:{3. 8°. I know this paper only from a mention of it by

Schuitze in his "Krauterabdriicke im Steinreiche," S. 10.

WA RD .]

THE FLOOD THEORY.

391

had to make way for it, but when philosophically viewed it will be seen

that it was really a decided advance upon those. This is clear when

we remember that it involves the admission that the petrified forms

represent true living forms that once inhabited the earth, which in so

far is a scientific truth not embodied in any of the hypotheses thus .far

considered. He who reads the discussion of those times cannot fail to

observe that it bears the stamp of all progressive controversy, in which

a more realistic conception is confronting and overthrowing older ideal-

istic ones.

,.

The first intimation that remains of the Flood might be looked for

seems to have come from Martin Luther, who in his commentary on the

book of Genesis said he had no doubt that surviving indications of the

Deluge might be found in the form of wood hardened into stone around

the mines and smelting mills.73 . Alexander ab Alexandro in his "Gen-

iales dies" (1522), also held this view, and was followed by Agricola

(1546), Matthiolus (1564), Gesner (1565), and Imperatus 74 (1599). But

this explanation made little or no headway against the fanciful theories

of the time, and it was not until nearly a century later that the flood-

theory, revived perhaps by a new edition of the work of Alexander ab

Alexandro,75 began to be reasserted and to take firm root. Dr. John

Woodward, of London, who was a great collector of fossils, published a

work in 1695 76 in which be held that all the solid parts of the earth's

crust were loosened by the Flood and mingled promiscuously in its

waters, and that at its close ever~~thing sank back to the surface ac-

cording to its specific gravity, the remains of animals and plants as-

suming the positions in the respective strata in which they are now found

petrified. Lhwsd, also, in the work already cited (1699) and other writ-

ings, gave countenance to this theory, which had thus acquired con-

siderable respectability prior to the opening of the eighteenth century.

But the greatest champion and expounder of the diluvian hypothesis

was still to come in the person.of Johann Jacob Scheucbzer, a brief

sketch of whose life and-work has already been given. His great work 77

appeared in 1709, in which he severely attacks all other theories and

brings forward a mass of evidence in favor of his own which has proved

of the greatest value to the progress of substantial knowledge and

especially to that of paleobotany. It is not by this really useful and

for its time important and remarkable work that, we fear, the name of

73 "Und ich zweifele nicht, dass noch von der Siindfl.uth her ist, dass man an Oert ern , da Bergwerck ist, oft Holtz findet, das schier zu Steinen gehartet ist." Martin Luther's Griindliche und Erbauliche Auslegung des Ersten Buchs Mosis, Halle, 1739, ' Band I , col. 176.
74 F errante Imperato. Dell' historia naturale. Napoli, 1590. 75 Alexander ab Alexandro. Genialium Dierum, libri vi. Parisiis, 1539, Lib. v, Caput ix, fol. 120. 76 John Woodward. An essay towards a natural history oftheearthand terrestrial bodies. London, 1695. (See pp. 74 et seq.) 77 J ohann Jacob Scheuchzer. Herbarium diluviannm. 'l'ignri, 1709.

392

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

Scheuchzer is to-day chiefly known, but rather by the one in which he committed a most serious, and to us ridiculous, blunder in his zeal for his favorite dogma by .describing the bones of a great salamander as those of a man who had been a witness of the Flood.78 Scheuchzer did not accept Woodward's explanation, but believed that the animals and p1ants were buried in t he slime and mud resulting ·from the Deluge and t here underwent the process of petrifaction. He divided all the objects that he described into three classes.....;_prediluvian, diluviail, and postdiluvian; but the first of these c asse~ seemed to contain little more than dendrites and other minerals that he supposed to have come from the solid earth below the deposit left by the Flood, while the third class embraced such obviously recent incrustations as were clearly seen to be in process of formation in springs and certain streams. The bulk of the fossils described were set down as diluvian, and many of them were specially so designated in the appendix to the new . edition published at Leyden in 1723.
Scheuchzer's work aroused a deep and widespread interest in the whole subject, and for many years collectors and writers vied with one another to discover additional evidences and describe new material. So supreme was his authority and so bold and forcible his reasoning that he carried conviction and inspired many disciples and followers. The diluvian theory became at once the prevailing doctrine, and nearly all the writers of the eighteenth century either openly espoused it or dared not oppose it. Mylius79 (1709) accepted it, Biittner80 (1710) saw signs and witnesses of it, Volkmann81 (1720) labored to multiply proofs of it, Briickmann82 (1727) and Da Costa83 (1755) indorsed it, while even Walch 84 (1768) and Schroter 85 (1774) raised but a feeble voice against it. . But the solid works of the two last-named authors and of a few others, and the now rapidly accumulating material for serious study combined w1th the few not always feeble protests, which, as we .shall presently see, had all along, but especially in the later years, been raised against the Deluge hypothesis, now began to eount heavily and to shake it at all points, and the last two decades of the eighteenth century were destined to see its collapse as rapid and complete as its rise had been sud-

78 Idem. Homo diluvii testis et eeo~K01ror;. Tiguri, li26. 4° . 79 G. F. Mylius. Memorabilia Saxonire subterranere. Leipzig, 1i09-1718.
e. ,son. S. Biittner. Rudera Diluvii T estes, i. Zeichen und Zeugen der Siind-Fluth.
Leipzic, 1710. 81 G. A. Volkmann. Silesia subterranere. Leipzig, 1720, pp. 85, 86. 82 Franc Ernest Briickmann. Magnalia Dei in locis subterraneis. Paris, 1727, fol. 83 Emanuel Mendes da Costa. On the impressions of plants on the slates of coals.
Phil. Trans. L, pp. 228-235, Pl. V. London, 1757. 84 J. E. Immanuel Walch. Die Na turgeschichte der Versteinerungeu zur Erli:iute-
ruug der Knorrischen Sammlung. Nurnberg, 1768-1773. 85 Johann Samuel Schroter. Vollstandige Einleitung in die Kenntniss und Ge-
SJhichte der Steine und Versteinerungen. Alteu.burg, 1774-1784. Versteinerungen des Pfianzenreichs, Bd. III, Kapitel I, pp. 99-238. (See especially pp. 106-109.)

WARD.)

EARLY RATIONAL VIEWS.

393

den and vigorous in the first decade. For although Hugh Miller86 was still able to find defenders of it as late as 1856, just as defenders of the geocentric theory can still be found, it was only among those who could have possessed no direct acquaintance with the real evidence, i.e., the fossils them,selves and the earth in which they were imbedded.
H~ving thus hastily reviewed the several unscientific theories that have at different periods been called in to explain the origin and nature of fossils in general and of fossil plants in particular, down to the close
of the last century, we may now consider with equal brevitythe history
and progress of rational, and finally of scientific, ideas upon the same
subject. As already r~marked the ancients, unfettered by any supposed reve-
lation with which all facts must be made to a~cord, had not doubted that the objects found in the earth having the same form as those of animals found in the sea, represented such animals that had inhabited the sea at some former time, but bow long ago they do not seem to have troubled thPmselves to inquire. Still there were not wanting those who · speculated upon the origin of life on the earth, and Empedocles 87 actually stated the theorem, which is still lacking the data for complete demoll'Stration, that vegetable life antedated animal life. How far the human mind proved capable of straying from this simple act of ratiocination we have already had occasion to see. It must not, however, be supposed that throughout the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, which we have been reviewing, no gliinmer of reason ever made itself perceptible through the thick night of scholastic mysticism that hung over the contemplation of nature in wh.atever form. Sarayna 88 (1540), Moscardus 89 ' (1556), Balthasar Klein (1564), in the sixteenth; Columna 90 (1606)Scilla 91 (1670), Ohioccus 92 (1622), Major 93 (1664), Hook ~4

86 Hugh Miller. Testimony of the Rocks, etc. Boston, 1857. · Lecture seventh. 87 See C. Sprengel's Programma de Empedocle ad disput. inaugur. Gor::e. Haire,
1B25.
88 Torellus Sarayna. Museum Calceolarii, p. 407.
Jdein. Bonanni Museum Kircherianum, p. 198. Idem. Museum Moscardi, p. 172.
89 Ludovico Moscardo. Note ovvero memorie del Museo del Conte Moscardo del medesimo descritte, Verona, 1556.
9°Fabius Columna. Minus cognitarum rariorumque nostro coelo orientium stirpium Ecphrasis, etc. Romre, 1606.
Idem. De purpura. Romre, 1616, et Kilire, 167.5. I have orily been able to consult the edition of 1675.
Idem. De Glossopetris. In the)ast and also appended to the next. 91 Augustinus Scilla. De corporilms marinis lapidescentibus qure defossa reperiuntur. Romre, 1670. I have seen only the editions of 1747 and 1752. 92 B. Cerutus e Andreas Chioccus. Francisci Calceolarii Museum luculenter descriptum. Veronre, 1622. 93 Johann Daniel Major. Dissertatio epistolica de cancris et de serpentibus petre· factis, etc., Jena, 1664. 94 Robert Hook. Micrographia, etc., London, 1665, p. 111.

.394

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

<1665), Merret 95 (1667), Steno 96 (1669), WedeP7 (1672), Boccone 98 (1674), Lister 99 (1678), Leibnitz100 (1693), Tenzel 101 (1694), in the seventeenth; Carl 102 (1704), Rosinus 103 (1719), Kundmann 104 (1737), Schultze 105 (1755), Parsons 106 (1757), Blumenbach 107 (1780), in the eighteenth century, and numerous others, recognized in one form or another the real character of -the fossils they were dealing with, some comparing them with living ani.mals and plants, and some, especially in the later years, boldly combating the vagaries and supernatural explanations of.the dominant schools. Most of these writers investigated the specimens themselves and drew their conclusions fresh from them, and in not a few cases the amount {)f such material in their hands for investigation was considerable.
During the seventeenth century these more rational utterances were of course without avail, but during the eighteenth they commenced to make themselves felt with increasing force. T.he diluvian hypothesis, as already remarked, was an advance toward the true conception, and the question now turned upon the manner in which these petrified re~ mains of once living things could have been placed where they were found. Kundmann and Schulze were among the boldest, and Morand 108 ·

95 Chrh;topher Merret. Pinax rerum naturalinm Brit.annicarum, continens vegeta-

bilia, ammalia et fossilia in hac i'nsnla reperta in,choatus. London, 1666 & 1667.

96 Nicolaus Steno. De solido intra solidum naturaliter contento a'issertationis pro-

-dromus. Florentim, 1669.

91 G. W. Wedel. De conchis saxatilibus. Ephemerid. Naturre Curiosornm, 1672.

JII, pp. 101-103, Pl. LXX. Lipsim et Prancf., 1681.

98 Paul Boccone. Recherches et observations naturelles toucbant le corail, etc.,

Amsterdam, 1674.

99 Martin Lister. Historim animalium tres Anglim tractatus quibus adjectus est

·quartus de lapidibus ad cochlearum quandam imaginem :figuratis. London, 1678•

.See the "Prmfatio" to this fourth treatise, in which, while ·favoring a tmTigenous

origin, he admits that if real animals they have now ceased to be generated. P. 199.

Idem. Synopsis methodica conchyliorum. 1685.

·

Idem. A description of stones figured like plants, and by some observing men

-esteeme<.l to be plants petrified. Phil. Trans. London, 1673, Vol. VIII, No, 100, pp,

·6181-6191. Pl. I.

100 G. W. Leibnitz. Acta erudita. Lipsim, 1693. P. 40.

101 W. E. Tenzel. Epistola ad Magliabechum de sceleto elephantino Tonnm nuper

-effossoo. J ena, 1694.

1w Samuel Carl. Lapis Lydius philosophicus pyrotechnicus ad ossium fossilil;m

docimasiam :malytice demonstrandum adhibitus, etc. Franc. ad Mrenam, 1704.

103 Michael Reinhold Rosin us. · Tentaminis de Ht,hozois ac lithophytis, olim marinis,

jam vero subterraneis, prodromus, etc. Hamburg, 1719. ·

104 J. C. Kundmann. Rariora naturm et artis, oder Seltenheiten der Natur und

Kunst des Kundmannscher Naturaiienkabinets. Breslau u. Leipzig, 1737. I. Ab-

.schnitt, 14. Artickel.

105 Ch. Fr. Schultze. Knrtze Betrachtung derer Krauterabdrjicke im Steinreiche.

.Dr·esden und Leipzig, 1755, S. 10.

·

•106 James Parsons. An account of some fossils, fruits, and other bodies found in

the island of Shepey. Phil. Trans., 1757, Vol. 50, pt. 2, p. 396.

107 Johann Friedrich Blumenbach~ Handbuch der Natnrgeschichte. Gottingen

1779-1780. 6. Aufl. 1799. Theil II, § 222,225. (See especially pp. ~tl8-708, ed. 1799.) ·

108 J. F. C. Morand. Die Kunst auf Steinkohlen zu bauen. Leipzig u. Konigs-

'berg, 1771, 4°. (Translated froni the French.)

/

WARH .)

VIEWS IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

395

(1771), Bauder 1~ (1772), and Suckow 110 (1782), wrote treatises in the true scientific spirit. But to Blumenbach is generally ascribed the credit of having fairly broken the spell and prepared the way for a science of paleontology. Not only in his "Handbucb" already mentioned, but also throughout his later "Beitdige" m which began in 1790, and his other works, be taught with authority that the beings to whose former existence these fossil forms were due were not only antediluvian but preadamitic, and that moreover there bad been a series of faunas and floras inhabiting the earth before the age of man.
The revolution, however, was not instantaneous nor abrupt. It bad been preparing for many years and could not have been much longer postponed. To understand the nature of this preparation it will be necessary to consider a few of the questions that came up for discussion and solution during the eighteenth century, and in attempting to do this we must now confine ourselves exclusively to those presented by the different forms of fossil vegetation. Without denying the superior importance of the evidence from animal remains, it may still be possible to vindicate the truth of the rather paradoxical statement of Brongniart that the vegetable kingdom should perhaps claim the honor of haying caused the ridiculous ideas which attributed these remains of the ancient world to freaks of nature and plastic forces to be aban~ doned. 112
Among these questions the two that seemed to dwarf all others were, first, Are these the remains of the same kind of plants that are now found growing upon the earth 0? and, second, When did the originals live .that have been preserved in this remarkable manner by turning into
stone~
When we consider what is now known about the geological strata of the earth's crust we can scarcely realize that but two generations ago comparatively nothing was known on this subject. Geology was not yet born. The investigators of the last century were really not discussing the geologic age of fossil remains. The assumption was universal that these were plants that grew somewhere in the world only a few thousand years ago at most, plants such as either grew then in the countries where their remains were found or in other countries from which they had been brought by one agency or another, generally that of the Flood, or else, as some finally conceived, had been destroyed by these ageticies, so as to have no exact living representatives. The writers of that period were therefore more or less divided among these three theories which we may respectively call (1) the indigenous theory,

109 F. Fr. Bauder. Nachrict von den seit einigen J ahren zu Altdorf von ihm entdeckten versteinerten Korpern. Jena, 1772.
110 Georg Adolph Suckow. Beschreibung einiger merkwiirdigen Abdriickevon der · Art der sogenanten Calami ten. Hist. et comment. Acad. elector. Theodoro-Pala"tinre, Tom. V, Physicum.Monheimii, 1784, p. 355.
111 Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte. 1790-1811. m Hi~toire des vegetaux fossiles, Tome I, p. 2.

396

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

(2) the exotic theory, and (3) the extermination theory. The most of them, however, admitted two or more of these explanations to account for different facts which could not be brought under a single one.
Scheuchzer, the great apostle of the Flood theory, considered the fossils as ordinary plants still to be found, and be gave them names taken from the standard botanical works, with all of which he was familiar, as well as with the flora of Switzerland, the Alps, and Europe in general. In the "editio novissima" of his "Herbarium diluvianum," 1723, be attempted in an appendix to arrange them all according to the system of Tournefort. Among the genera which he confidently puts down
are found Gallium (= Galium), l!"'ragaria, Fumaria, Osmunda, Saxifraga,
Sorbus, Trifolium, Vitis, etc., and he occasionally ventures to give the species, as Populus nigra. Volkmann, in his "Silesia subterranea" (1720), is not less certain that be sees in one impression th~ myrrh of the Scriptures, and in another the common Hippuris, or mare'~-tail. Lange 113 (1742) and Moering 114 (174:8) were satisfied with the faintest resemblances to living plants, while Lehmann 115 (1756) labored hard to prove that the impressions of Annularia sphenophylloides, which occf r at different depths in the coal mines near Ihlefeld, Hohenstein, wer,e flowers of Aster montanus (A. Amellus or A. Sibiricus) caught in f~I bloom and petrified in situ. Many others 116 preceded Walch, who w s himself unable to free himself from the popular conceptions. He co pared his Lithophytes with indigenous plants, from which he also d rived certain supposed fossil flowers.
The exotic theory, though equally untrue with the indigenous theory, marked a decided advance, since it was the outcome of careful study, and a supposed escape from some of the objections to the other mode of explanation. Very early in the century certain authors had been led by curiosity or some other motive to compare the finest of these impressions with specimens of living plants, then already well represented in European herbariums, from many distant countries. The earliest case of this kind on record is that of Leibnitz, who in 1706 furnished a note 117 on the oecurrence of impressions of supposed Indian plants in Gerll)any,. a conclusion which he arrived at from a comparison of fossils with living specie~ from India, and believed them to agree. Twelve years·

113 Nic cllaus Langius. De schisto ejus indole atque genesi meditationes cum descriptione duorum vegetabilium rariorum, etc. Acta Acad. nat. cur., Tom. VI. App., p. 133, tab. II.
114 Paul Gerard Moering. Phytolithus zere Linnrei in schisto nigro. Acta Acad. nat. cur., Tom. VIII, p. 448.
115 J. G. Lehmann. Dissertation sur les :fleurs de l'Aster montanus, ou pyrenaique
precoce a :fleurs bleues eta feuilles de saule, empreintes sur l'ardoise. Hist. de l'acadL des sci. et de belles lettres de Berlin, 1756, pp. 127-144.
116 C. F. Schultze. Die bei Zwickau gefundenen Krauterabdrlicke. Neue gesellEchaftl. :Erzahlungen, 1758. Theil I, pp. 42-48.
P. F. Davila. Catalogue systematique et raisonne des curiosites de la nature et de, l'art. Paris, 1767. See Tome III, pp. 237-254, Pl. VI, VII, VIII.
m Histoire des sciences, Paris, 1706, pp. 9-11.

WARD.)

VIEWS IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

397

later Antoine de Jussieu 118 published his celebrated memoir upon the · .coal plants of Saint Chaumont, in which he discussed the differences between them and European ferns and their resemblance to those of the tropics.
The idea of the tropical facies offossil plants was thenceforward frequently put forth, as by Lesser 119 (1735), Oapeller 120 (1740), Sauvages 121 (1743), etr. Parsons 122 (1757) declared that some of the petrified fruits found on the Island of Sheppey were "' absolutely exotics/' and Dulac 123 (1765) discovered in the coal mines of Saint Etienne, now so carefully explored by Grand' Eury, impressions which he likened to American ferns. Walch leaned toward the exotic theory, and declared that so imperfect were the remains that their true identity could not be made out, and that the tendency had been too much to imagine indigenous species to exist where they were in reality foreign ones. He pointed out the fact that the fossil plants of England, France, and Germany were substantially the same, which is not the case to any such extent with the living floras, and even where no similarity with living plants could be traced he had no better explanation than that they must belong to unknown exotic species.
As intermediate between the exotic theory, or that of transportation by the Flood, and the extermination theory, or that of destruction by the Flood, and as, to some extent, an initial stage of the latter, there was called in a degeneration theory, which Volkma~n 124 sets forth as clearly as it was probably ever conceived by any of the contemporary writers, which certainly is not saying a great deal. According to this theory the antediluvian vegetation was of a far higher order than that of postdiluvian origin, and contained none of the tho:r;ns, thistles, and other scourges with which we are familiar. It also contained many useful and wholesome fruit-bearing trees, of which our .~podern forests are the degenerate representatives. Ideas like these were frequently expressed, and even Bu:ffon entertained some notion of a state of faunal and floral degeneration.

118 Examen des causes des impressions des pl::~.ntes marquees sur certaines pierres des environs de Saint Chaumont. Mem. de l'acad. royale des sciences. Paris, 1718, p. 287. It is remarkable that both Brongniart (Hist. des veg. foss.', Tome I, p. 3) and .Schimper (Traite de pal. veg., Tome I, p. 4) sl1ould have committed the error of crediting this paper to :6ernard instead of Antoine de Jussieu. The former would have been ()nly nineteen years of age; but Brongniart makes the further ·mistake of assigt1ing the date as 1708 (loc. cit., foot-note 1), which would have made him only nine years ()}d. See also a second memoir, loc. cit., 1721.
n g Friedrich Christ. Lesser. Lithotheologie, oder noturhistorische und geistliche Betrachtung der Steine. Hamburg, 1735, p. 642.
120 Maurus Antonius Capeller. Sciagraphia lithologica. Gedani, 1740, p. 6. 121 L'Abbe de Sauvages. Sur differentes petrifications, etc. Mem. de l'acad. roy. des sciences. 1743, p. 415. 122 James Parsons. Philosophical Transactions. 1757, Vol. L, p. 397.
123 Alleon Dulac. Memoire pour servir a l'histoire naturelle des provinces de Lyon-
nois, Forez, et Beaujolois. Lyon, 1765. Tome LI. 124 Silesia subterranea, p. 92.

398 SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.
The conception of a gradual degeneration would be logically followed with that of complete _extinction, but, so far as we know, the latter view found expression earlier than the former. Leibnitz, in the memoir · already cited (1706), speaks of the proofs of great ph;ysical changes taking place on the surface of the earth. Both Scheucbzer and Mylius .admitted that many kinds of living creatures may have been utterly exterminatedby the Flood. Jussieu proposed extinction as an alternative explanation. Rosinus 125 (1719) stated that among fossil Encrinites and Belemnites there were some whose originals were unknown. ·Volkmann and the other theological expounders believed in diluvian extermination, and thus explained the facts known to them that fossil trunks are often found on barren islands where no trees ever grew.126 Walch admitted very little in this fertile direction, although he regarded the Calamitre as the remains of great reeds which had no known living representatives. Suckow, however, in the memoir already referred to, where he was the first to recognize the affinity of the Calamitre with Equisetum, decided, after careful comparison with E. giganteum and other large living species, that they probably belonged to extinct species.
The idea that the fossil remains might represent extinct species of forms once indigenous to Europe now began to take shape and to work a profound revolution in prevailing theories. The question then, referred to a few pages back, as to the time when the originals must have been living, became one of paramount importance and led to the investigation of the stratified rocks. This was the origin of true paleontological research. But it could scarcely have been begun earlier. Stratigraphical geology was also at the same moment in the act of being born. Werner had founded his Neptunian theory, and Hutton his Plutonian, while William Smith was teaching bow to determine the age of rocks by the fossils they contain.
'rhe puerile speculations about the nature of fossils which we have been considering can be better.excused when we remember that nothing whatev-er was known of the earth. So long as it was Isupposed to be only a few thousand years old, and as the only disturbance of which men had ever heard was that of the Mosaic deluge, we may well doubt whether the most astute of our present geologists would have conceived any better explanations. In this respect th~ .Ancients had the advantage. Even Pythagoras is said to have taug1jlt that the land was once under the sea. Xenopbanes and Herodotus bj oth expressed this same idea, and Aristotle himself is known to have entertained something like an adequate conception of time limitF.127 Tertullian (supra,, p. 386, note 49) uttered the last faint rcho of this thought, which thenceforward seems to have slumbered until the middle of
12s Supra, p. 394, note 103. 126 Volkmann. Silesia subterranea, p. 93. 127 Meteorologicorum, Lib. I, Cap. XIV, 31; Lib. II.

WARD.l

'.fHE SCIENTIFIC PERIOD.

39~

the fifteenth century, when Leonardo da Vinci revived it, attacked
the current scholastic doctrines, and maintained that the fossils which had been the subject of so much interest in Italy had been living creatures and had once 1ived in the sea. .A century later Sarayna,. as we have seen, asserted the organic origin of the Veronese petrifactions, and Fracastorius explained the fossils of the Kircherian,. Moscardan, and Calceolarian Museums by assuming that the mountains containing them had stood in the water during the time the animals lived, and that these had left their remains on the retreat of the waters. These and all similar voices were, however, drowned amid the angry and senseless discussions of the time. .Nicholas Steno,. towards the end of the seventeenth century, in a work to which attention has already been called (sup'ra, p. 394, note 96), recognized the different ages of stratified rocks, and asserted that the oldest rocks contained no fossils. In the posthumous "Protogma" 128 of Leibnitz, which must have been written very early in the eighteenth century, a cosmogony is elaborated which recognizes something like the true process of sedimentation, but is vitiated entirely by an attempt to harmonize it with the literal six days cosmogony of Moses. Lehmann (1756), whose errors, so far as his conclusions were concerned, we have already mentioned,. nevertheless performed a truly pioneer work both for geology and for paleobotany in correctly indic~ting the relative depth, position, and relations of the different strata with their characteristic vegetable remains in the coal region at Ihlefeld. These and a few other like treatises prepared the way for Blumenbach and the sound views which began t() prevail at the close of the eighteenth century. The inadequacy of the Flood theory to explain the facts and the conviction that there must have been a series of antecedent revolutions in the floras and faunas of the globe began to inspire research, and promised the fruitful results which, in fact, so soon and so richly followed.

2. THE SCIENTIFIC PERIOD.
Having thus rapidly passed in review the long crepuscular period of speculation, conjecture, and groping research which was necessary to precede and prepare for the true advent of science-a period throughout :r:nost of which no real science of paleontology could be s~id to exist , or, if havinl.,.La quasi-existence, its zoologic and phytologic br.anches were as yet fort~~ most part undifferentiated-the scientific period, which, S() · .far at least as plants are concerned, literally began with the beginning of the presentcentury, next claims attention. In the biological sketches which preceded this historical one. the chronologie arrangement was. adopted, and in this, therefore, was necessarily embraced much of the true history of the science, but, as there stated, this form of treatment.
128 G. W. Leibnitz. Protogrea, sive de prima facie telluris et antiquissimre histori re vestigiis in ipsis naturre monumentis dissertatio; ex schedis manuscriptis viri illustris. in lucem edita a C. Scheidio. Gottingre, 1749. §XLV treats of fossil trees and wood;. §XLVI of peat, and§ XLVII ofthe Luneburg fossil trees.

·\

400

SKETCH OF - PALEOBOTANY.

necessarily leaves out many of the important facts in the history of the subject. It also fails to connect the principal points into an unbroken series and to correlate events and discoveries into a systematic whole. The chiefly chronologie treat.meut which will now be presented, while still lacking in philosophic method and otherwise defective, wilJ aim to supply most of the omissions referred to, and will perhaps be more useful than any other form of treatment which could well be made within the limited space which can be devoted to it.
The new epoch was auspiciously ushered in on the first year of the century by the memoir, already ouce referred to (supra p. 371), of the Baron von Schlotheim in Hoff'~ Magazine, in which he applied the same reasoning to plants that Blumenbach had done to animals.
Leopold von Buch129 (1802) inaugurated the remarkable discussion as to whether the coal plants actually grew on the spot where they are found in the carbonized or silicified state, which was continued by Ste:ffens,130 Leonhard,131 Noeggerath,132 Sternberg, Brongnhirt, and Lindley and Hutton,133 but is by no means settled, and still goes on in France, England, and the United States. Two papers, by 1\ti. Faujas de Saint Fond/34 breathing the true scientific spirit of research appeared at about the same time and attracted much interest.
In 1804 appeared Von Schlotheim's epoch-making work, "Flora de Vorwelt/' as it is now universally quoted, although the author himself merely entitled it a description of remarkable plant impressions and petrifactions, a contribution to the flora of the former (or primeval) world. To us this seems modest enough, but in view of the history of paleontology which we have been considering, we may readily see that this second part of the title was a bold declaration, and accordingly we find him defending it in his introduction by these words : "The petrifactions which so early engaged the attention of investigators, and which, without doubt, afforded one of the first incentives to the founding of mineral collections and to the earnest study of mineralogy and geology, have, as is well known, since Walch began to arrange them systematically, been for a long time, as well in as outside of Germany, almost wholly
129 Leopold von Buch. Geognostische Beobachtungen auf Reisen durch Deutschland und Italien. Band I, Berlin, 1802. S. 92.
130 Heinrich Steffens , Geognostisch-geologische Aufsatze. Hamburg, 1810. S. 267. 131 K. C. Von Leonhard. Redentung nnd Stand der Mineralogie. Frankfort, 1816.
s. 70. 71.
132 J acob Noegger a th. Ueber aufrect im Gebirg~;gestein eingeschlossene fossile Baumsta mme und ander e Vegetabilien. Historisches und Beobachtung. Bonn, 181!>-'21.
133 Fossil Flora of Great Britain, Vol. II, pp. xvii, xx, xxii. 134 Barthelemy Faujas de Saint F.ond. Description des mines de Ttirffa des environs de Bruhl et de Liblar, connues sons la denomination impropre de mines de terre d'ombre, ou terre brune de Cologne. Annales du Museum d'histoire natnrelle, Tome I, pp. 445-460, avec 2 planches. Paris, 1802. (See Pl. XXIX.) Idem. Notice sur des plantes fossiles de diverses especes qu' on trouve dans les couches fossiles d'un schiste marneux, reconvert par des laves, dans les environs de Rochesauve, departe:rpent de l'Ardeche. (Loc. cit. Tome II, 1803, pp. 339-344, Pl. LVI et LVII.)

WARD.]

PIONEERS IN PALEOBOTANY.

401

neglected. They were content to regard them as incontestable proofs
of the Deluge, and closed all further investigation until they were at
last compelled to explain their occurrence through other great natural operations which had probably been going on earlier and more universally than the flood described in the Bible, and influencing the formation of the upper strata of the earth's crust; and more recent observa-
tions and investigations have even led us to the very probable supposition that they may be the remains of an earlier so-called pre-adamitic creation, the orig-inals of u.•hich are now no longer to be found. * * * ln the continued investigation of this subject this opinion, with certain
restrictions, has in fact gained a high degree of probability with the
author of the present work, so that he ventures to announce his treatise as a coutribution to the flora of the ancient world (Vorwelt)."
Since its introduction by Schlotheim this expression, "Flora der Vorwelt," has been applied to nearly all the German works on ~ossil plants,
and " Beitd.ige zur Flora der Vorwelt" still continue to appear. Only
one Yolume of this work appeared at this time, with fourteen plates; the completion, owing to political disturbances which so often interrupt the quiet march of science, was deferred until the year 1820, when the remaining plates were published with the first and with those relating to animal remains as an atlas to his "Petrefaktenkunde." 135
Schlotheim worked conscientiously, drew his figures clearly and well, and sought diligently in all the European herbaria for forms with
which his fossil plants could be compared. He seriously doubted the identity of the plant that had always been regarded as the common Hippuris vulgaris, and concludes that if any of the species he has figured a:r:e Btillliving they must belong· to tropical countries.
An important English work,136 one volume of which is devoted to vegetable remains, and bears date 1804, or the same as Schlotheim's ''Flora der Vorwelt," has for its title "Organic remains of a former world," the last two words of which are a fair translation of the German Vorwelt. Dr. Parkinson was a very learned man, and shows that he was familiar wit the con mental literature of his subject, but he nowhere refers to Schlotheim's work, and may safely be assumed to have been , unacquainted with it. 137 The work is written in an erudite · manner, and is full of historical interest, but ~s a contribution to science it is far inferior to that of Schlotheim . . The figures, though better than most of those of the time, are less clear than the German author's, even where true leaf-prints and fronds are figured. But they mostly depict specimens of petrified wood and problematical fruits. Parkinson did

(
1
t
\

135 See the "Petrefaktenkunde," p. 424. 136 James Parkinson. Organic remains of a Former World. An examination of the mineralized remains of the vegetables and animals of the antediluvian world; generally termed extraneous fossils, Vol. I, containing the Vegetable Kingdom. London, 1804. 137 A remark made by M. Schimper (Traite de pal. veg., Tome I, p. 8) might lead to .the supposition that this work had been written many years later.
GEOL 84--26

·.

402

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

not regard it possible to identify the plants. For this work he called to his aid Dr. James Edward Smith, president of the Linnrean Society, an accomplished botanist, and together they faithfully compared all the specimens they had. The result_was that while a greater or less similarity was detected between different ferns and the living genera Pteris, Dicksonia, Osmunda, Polypodium, and Adiantum, Dr. Smith was unwilling to say that they actually represented these genera, and. he '' conjectured that they were all foreign, and productions of a warm climate."
In the conclusions which he draws from the facts stated in the first volume of his work, Dr. Parkinson clearly shows that he is still heavily shackled by the current fallacies relating to the subject he has treated. The Deluge is still a potent influence and the "Former World" is not the modern geologist's Paleozoic, nor even the" Vorwelt" of Schlotheim.
Great activity in this branch of science followed the appearance of these works. As already showh (supra, p. 371), it was in 1804 that Count Sternberg began to write, though partly instigated by the papers of Faujas de Saint Fond,I38 who still continued his investigations.139 Voigtl40 (1807) discussed the so-called Psarolithes of the l\iusenm Lenziauum at Jena, and pronounced them fossil polyps, but retracted this decision the next y(' ar,141 and admitted their vegetable character. We pen142 (1808) · also mentions a number of specimens of petrified wood from the .East Indies, Siberia, and various parts of Europe. This question was further treated by Bteffens,I43 Oken in his '' Lehrbuch _ der Naturgeschichte,m44 Hoff,145 and Schlotheim. Martin's "Petrificata Derbiensia" 146 is regarded as a forerunner of future work in Great Britain
on theS'triicture of trunks and on the study of the vegetable remains of the coal-measures. Schlotheim's '' Beitdige zur Naturgeschichte der Versteinerungen in geognostischer Hinsicht'1147 (1813) was an appeal for greater thoroughness in paleontological research. In 1814 Kieser148 first pointed out the characteristic structure of coniferous wood which
138 Bemerkungen itber die von Faujas de St. Fond beschrieberien fossilen Pflanzen. Botanische Zeitung. No. 4. 29. :Februa.ry, 1804, pp. 48-52.
139 Faujas de Saint Pond. Memoirs in the ''Annales du museum d'histoire naturelle", Tome VIII, 1806, p. 220; Tome XI, 1808, p. 144 ; and in the "Memoires," Tome II, 1815, p.444 ; Tome V, 1819., p. 162.
140 Johann Karl Wilhelm Voigt. Kurze minerogiscbe Bemerkungen. Leonhard's Taschenbuch fiir Mineralogie. · Erster Jahrgang, pp. 120-124.
141 Idem. Loc cit. Zweiter Jahrgang, pp. :385-386. 142 J. A. Weppen. Nacbricht von einigen besonders merkwurdigen Versteinerun gen und l!,ossilien seines Kabinets. Leonhard's Tascbenbncb, Hand II, p. 178. 143 Heinrich Steffens. Handbuch der 0Iyktognosie, Halle. 1811, Band I, p. 172-186. 144 Tb. I, p. 300, 1812. 145 K. E. A. von Hoff. Beschreibung des 'l'rummergebirgs und des altern Flotzgeuirgs, welche den Thiiringen Wald umgeben. Leonh. Taschenb., Band VIII, 1814, p. 350. 146 William Martin. Petrificata Derbiensia; or, Figures and descriptions of P etrifactions collected in Derbyshire. 4to, Wigan, 1809. 147 Leonhal'd's Taschenbuch, Band VII, 18(3, p. 1. 148 Dietrich Georg Kieser. Elemente der Phytonomie, oder Grundzuge der Anatomie der Pflanzen. Jena, 1815. Appendix.

WARD .)

PIONEERS IN PALEOBOTANY.

403

has h;:td such an important bearing on the study of petrified woods. In 1796 IIagen149 had published a memoir on the origin of amber, which was supplemented by Dr. John, of Cologne, in his large work150 on that substance, discussing it from almost every conceivable point .of view. Relative to the kind of tree that is supposed to have produced the amber he says (p. 168) it is very probable that a species o~ the genus Pinus_ formerly grew in Prussia which, as is the case with many other plants, is now wholly extinct.
Passing over some less important memoirs we come to that of the Rev. Henry Steinhauer ''On Fossil Reliquia of Unknown Vegetables in the Coal Strata.''151 Few papers of this period are more often or approvingly quoted than this. AlthOLlgh presented to an American society by one of its members, then a resident of Bethlehem, Pa., it treats the subject in a thoroughly general way. 'fhe author had evidently spent the greater part of his life in Great Britain, and was well acquainted with British localities and British fossils. In fact, no mention whatever is made of any American locality, and the paper would have been perfectly at home in any of the scientific journals of England. The remark, therefore, of M.. Schimper152 to the effect that Steinhauer had laid the foundations of vegetable paleontology in America by a study of the vegetable impressions of the coal-measures of this country, seems not to be historically aceurate. Probably the most important feature of this able paper is the attempt made in it to classify the vegetable remains of the Carboniferous. No special mention has thus far been made of similar previous attempts by Scheuehzer, Walch, Sclotheim, etc., because the more complete treatment of this important snqiect is reserved for a future place as an independent and connected study, and we will not anticipate this branch of our subject here.
Omitting a number of works in which vegetable fossils are either ex:. pressly treated, or least casually referred to, as by Ballenstedt and Kriiger,153 Raumer/54 Schweigger,155 d'Aulmisson de Voisins,156 and Nilsson/57

149 K / G. Hagen. De succini ortu. Ueber den Ursprung des Bernsteins. Riga, 179();

see, also, Gilbert's Annalen, Band XIX, 1805, p. 181.

150 J. F. John. Naturgeschichte des Snccins, oder des sogenannten Bernsteins.

Koln, 1816.

·

151 Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. Philadelphia, Vol. I, 1818,

p. 265.

I51l Traite de Pal. Veg. Tome I, p. 16.

153 J. G. F. Ballenstedt. Die Urwelt. 3. Aufl. Quedlinburg, 1819.

Johan Gottlob }{rUger. Geschichte der Urwelt. Leipzig, 1820, Bd. II, pp. 95-254.

Ballenstedt & Kruger. Archiv fiir die Entdeckung in der Urwelt. 6 Bde. Qued-

lingburg, 1819-'1824.

1M Carl von Raumer. Das Gebirge Niederschlesiens ... geognostisch dargestellt.

Berlin, 1819, p. 166 (Anmerkungen).

t55 A. F. Schweigger. Beobacbtungen auf naturhistorischen Reisen. Berlin, 1819.

156 D'Anbuisson de Voisins. Traite de Geognosie. 1819, Tome II, pp. 294, 298.

157 Sveno Nilsson. Om Forsteningar @ch Aftryck af tropiska tradslag, Blad, orm-

bunkar och rorvaxter m. m. samt tradkol, funna i ett Sandstenslager i Skane. Kongl.

Vetenskaps Akademiens Handlingar, 1820, pp. 108-122, 278-293.

404

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

which appeared in 1819 or 1820, the last named of which contains the earliest descriptions of the plant remains of the interesting locality of Hor, in South Sweden, afterward more carefully studied by Bronguiart,158 we find in the year 1820 three treatises of prime importance: Rhode's "P:fianzenkunde der Vorwelt," 159 Schlotheim's '' Pet.refactenkunde," (supra, p. 371), and Sternber 's "Flora rler Vorwelt" (supra, p. 371). Rhode studied the coal plants of Silesia, and was the predecessor of Goppert in that line of work. · He discovered the now well-known fact that thick stems often silicify within while carbonizing without, which he d1 ss as well as the questions treated by Schlotheim and his predecessors relative to the real nature of plant impressions. He fig-
ured r. epidodendron, Sigillaria, and other coal plants, and his plates
are still frequently quoted. Like Lehmann, he mistook certain verticillate fm'ms for flowers, but represented them none the less faithfully. His work was never finished, being interrupted by the premature death of the author. Sternberg treated the subject of vegetable remains both from the geognostic and the botanical points of view, and his work wa~ undoubtedly the most advanced contribution that had been made up to this date. We have already referred to it in a general way, and as ,its chief interest centers upon the system of classification which he proposed we must defer the more detailed account of it until this subject is reached. Less than an eighth of Schlotheim's "Petrefactenkunde" is devoted to plants, but it is systematically arranged, and the families, genera, and species are named according to the binomial method of Linnams, giving the work a decidedly modern appearance. About the only other work referred to in it is h1s own "Flora der Vorwelt," the plates of which are reproduced, and others added. He had evidently not met with the paper of Steinhauer, and appeared not to be aware of the labors of Sternberg.
These works gave a new impetus to the science of fossil plants, and in the following year a number of papers appeared describing discoveries in special localities in Germany/60 :France,I61 England/62 and America.l63 In this year also appeared Adolphe Brongniart's first and very important paper on the classification and naming of fossil plants,

1~8 Annales des Science Naturelles. Tome IV, p. 200. Pl. XI, XII. Paris, 1825. 159 J. G. Rhode. Beitdige zur Pflanzenkunde derVorwelt. Breslan, 1820. 160 B. S. von Nau. Pflanzenabdrticke und Versteinerungen aus dem Kohlenwerke von St. Ingbert im baierischen Rheinkreis verglichen mit lebenden Pflanzen aus . warmeren Zonen. Denkschr. der kongl. Akad. d. Wiss. zn Miinchen, Band VII, 1821,
s. 283.
101 Alexandre Brongniart. Notice sur des v6getaux fossiles traversant les couches du terrain houiller. Aunales des Mines, Tome VI, 1821, pp. 359-370.
I62 Tbomas Allan. Description of a vegetable impression found in the quarry of
Craigleith. Trans. Roy. Soc., Edinb., Vol. IX, 1823, p. 235. Patrick Brewster. Description of a fo!'lsil tree found at Niteshill, etc. Loc. cit.,
p. 10:3, Pl. IX. I&>Ebenezer Granger. Notice ofvegetable impressions on the rocks connected with
the coal formation of Zanesvi1le, Ohio. Am. Journ. Sci., 1st ser., Vol. III, 1821, p. 5.

WARD.)

FOUNDERS OF PALEOBOTANY.

405

which has been quoted already (supra, p. 372), and will receive special attention further on.
Four important works appeared in 1822, viz., (1) a memoir by Adolphe Brongniart, contained in the "Description geologique des environs de Paris," by Cuvier and Alex. Brongniart (also in Cuvier's "Recherches sur les ossements fossiles," Tome V, pp. 640...:674, ed. 1.835), describing the fossil plants of the Paris basin; (2) Mantell's Fossils of the South Downs,
or Illustrations of the Geology of Sussex, in which the plant remains,
though meager, are mostly dicotyledonous, or fruits of Conifers, etc.
(see Plates VIII and IX and pp. 157 and 262); (3) Martins, "De plantis
nonnullis antedi1uvanis ope specierum inter tropicos viventium illustrandis;" 164 and (4) Schlotheim's "Nachtrag zur Petrefactenkunde," which, though chiefly devoted to animal fossils, contains an interesting chapter on fossil seaweeds.
Brongniart took up the subject of fossil seaweeds, or fucoids, the following year,165 but with the exception of two or three unimportant papers nothing else appeared in 1823, though research was none the less active.
Much the same could be said for the year 1824, although the contributions of Buckland,166 Sir Henry Thomas de la Beche,I67 and Dr. Mantell168 in England, Defrance 169 in France, and Nilsson 170 in Sweden added to the stock of knowledge in this department. Sternberg publiehed an important memoir in Flora,,171 and Martins began .his great work on the palms,172 which has at least proved an"'aid to paleobotany, and to which Unger eventually supplied the fossil department.
The year 18 5 was characterized in England by an important illustrated work by Edmund Tyrell Artis, entitled "Antediluvian Phytology," which, notwithstanding Brongniart's criticism,173 and the fact that most of his species have been.obliged to give way, must ever remain one of the classics of paleobotany, though rather as a work of art than of science. The author discusses in a very rational manner the progress of ideas relative to geology, but shows the proximity of his time to the age of pure discussion by admitting that he had undertaken to prepare himself to write the work because "convinced of the importance of this

I

164 Denkschriften der koniglich-baierischen batanischen Gesellschaftin Regensberg, Band II, 1822, p. 121, Pl. II-X.
165Mem. de la Soc. d'Hist. Nat., Paris, Tome I, pp. 301-321, Pl. xix-xxi. 166 Trans. Geol. Soc. London, ser. ii, Vol. I, Part I, p. 210. 167 Loc. cit., Pt. II, pp. 45, 162, Pl. VII, Figs. 2, :3. 168 Loc. cit., Part II, p. 421. 169 J acqnes Louis Marin Defrance. Tableau des corps organises fossiles, precede des remarques sur les petrifications. Paris, 1824. (See pp. 123, 124, 126.)
°17 Kongl. Vetenskaps-Academiens Handlingar, 1824, pp. 143-148, Pl. II. Stock-
holm, 1824. m Bd. VII, p. 689. 172 C. F. Martins. Genera et species palmarnm quas in itinere per Brasiliam annis
1817-1820. . . collegit. Monachii, 1824-1849. 173 Hist. des veg. foss., Tome I, p. fi.

406

SKETCH OJ<, PALEOBOTANY.

study in affording the materials on which the geologist may found his theoretical speculations." The plates are certainly beautiful and also faithful, and they have been largely drawn upon by later authors. A second edition of the work appeared in 183::.
Three important papers by Brongniart appeared during the same year in the ".Annales des sciences naturelles" (Tome IV, pp. 23, 200, 417), one of which has just been referred to. Sir .Alexander Crichton's memoir on the climate of the antediluvian world 174 attracted considerable attention and was copied into several of the scientific journals on the continent.
During 1826 few results were made known, and the only monograph of special note that appeared in 1827 was Jaeger's '' Pflanzenversteinerungen," 175 which was a praiseworthy effort, and although the illustrations fall below the standard erected by Schlotheim and Artis, the geognostic treatment has been considered able, and the work is still quoted.
The year 1828 is without question the most eventful one in the history of paleobotany, since it saw the issue of Brongniart's "Prodrome," and the commencement of his "Histoire des Vegetaux fossiles" (supra, p. 372), which, taken together as they belong, form the solid basis upon which the science has since been erected. We will first consid3r the · "Prodrome," which merely forms an introduction to the other work, not as it is, but as it was, designed by its author to be. The" Histoire" stopped before the cryptogamic series had been finished, but in the "Prodrome" he takes us through the phenogamic series also as he understood it. Brongniart's fundamental conception was that fossil plants were not the less plants, and that so fast as they really became known they should be placed in their proper position in the vegetable series and made to form an integral part of the science of botany. In his classification, which will be given in another place, he therefore had due respect for the natural system as then understood, but he nevertheless felt that geognostic considerations must be taken into the account, and he saw, with almost prophetic accuracy, that in passing up through the geologic series higher and higher forms of vegetable life presented themselves. This seems simple enough to us of this age, and might seem trite to the reader did we not find, several years later, some of the ablest authorities both in botany and geology warmly contesting it, as we shall presently see. Although unable to understand the complete continuity in the series, as modern evolution requires, and although affected by the Cuvierian idea of successive destructions and re-creatiolls, still he insisted that each successive creation was superior to the one it had replaced,
and that there had thus been, as it were, a steady progress from t~e

174 Alexander Crichton. On the Climate oft he Antediluvian World, etc. Annals of Philosophy, Vol. IX, pp. 97, 207. (See especially pp. 99-102.) . 175 Georg Friedrich Jaeger. Ueber die Pflanzenversteinernngen welcbe in dem Bau.sandtStein von Stuttgart Yorkommen. Stuttgart, 1827. (There is an abstract in French in the Ann. Sci. Nat., Paris, Tome XV, 1828, p. 92.)

WAR D.]

LABORS OF BRONGNIART.

407

lowest to the highest forms of vegetation. He believed in the gradual reduction of temperature in the climate of the globe from the earliest times, and in the purification of the atmQsphere from a former excess of carbonic acid, favorable only to the lower types which then prevailed. He divided the geologic series into four great periods, the first extending through the Carboniferous, the second embracing the gres bigarre, or Bnntersandstein, only, the third seeming to include the rest of the Trias, the Jurassic, and the Cretaceous, and the fourth completing the series. The table which he gives on page 219 is calculated to show the development of the higher types of vegetation in successively higher strata, and may profitably be compared with the one having the same form, which will be found below\injra, pp. 440-441 ). Of this table he remarks that in the first period there exist hardly anything but Cryptogams, plants having a more simple structure than that of the following classes. In the second period the number of the two following classes becomes proportionately greater. During the third period it is the Gymnosperms which specially predominate. This class of plants may be considered intermediate between the Oryptogams and the true Phenogams (Dicotyledons), which preponderate during the fourth period. The words italicized in the liberal translation here made are scarcely less than a prophecy, and one whose fulfillment is only now being tardily granted by systematic botanists. In this tabular exhibit Brongniart enumerates 501 species-of fossil plants known to him, 240 of wbich belonged to the first period (Paleozoic), 25 to the second,. 72 to the third, and 164 to the fourth. He also states the number of living species at 50,350. A eomparison of these figures with those of our own time, as given in the table below, will afford a sort ot measure by which to judge of the nineteenth century as an era of scientific discovery.
Brongniart propounded a theory for the primordial distribution of __rland vegetation over the globe which is well worth a passing notice, and is not weakened by modern theories of post-glacial distribution, which might also be true. His theory, in brief, was that it began on small islands, the only land then existing ; that these islands became gradu. ally united and consolidated into continents upon which a different vegetation, more varied, and more like the present vegetation could exist, and be says that it was not until after the formation of the chalk (i.e., the beginning of the Tertiary) that such a continental vegetation seemed to have appeared. He concludes from this that it was from this period that large areas of the earth's surface began to be laid bare, and that true continents commenced to be formed. He regarded it as remarkable that great changes in both the flora and the fauna of the globe should have taken place almost simultaneously; that the age of Cycads should correspond with that of reptiles and the age of Dicotyledons with that of mammals (p. 221 ). But unless fresh discoveries of this last-named class of animals shall be hereafter made in the middle Uretaceous we must regard this second coincidence as now disproved.

408 SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.
The great work of Brongniart, his n Histoire des Vegetaux fossiles," proceeds with only a brief historical introduction to the systematic elaboration of the fossil plants in the order laid down in the" Prodrome." One entire volume was finished and a second begun without completing the Cryptogams. Seventy-two quarto pages are all that appear in the published editions of the second volume, which are devoted to a thorough discussion of the Lycopodiacem. The first volume is illustrated by 166 plates, and 29 accompany the second volume.
Besides these works l;>y Brongniart, which bear date 1828, no less than five other memoirs from his pen relating to fossil plants appeared in that year. 176 A number of other contributions to vegetable paleonc tology swell the extraordinarily rich literature of the subject in 1828, only oneofwhichcan be noticed in this hasty sketch. This is Anton Spren' el's "Commentatio de Psarolithis, ligni fossilis ge nere," the best treatise on fossil woods that had thus far appeared. He reviews the history of the subject from a rational stand-point, gives a systematic classification, and describes six species of Endogenites, illustrating internal structure in one plate. The work is a small octa\o pamphlet of 42 pages, published at Halle, in Latin; but for one so unpretentious it has commanded a high tribute of respect.
In 1829 Phillips -published Part I of his "Geology of Yorkshire," so well known to both geologists and pa1eontologists. Like most English writers, he was behind the writers of France and Germany in appreciating the reYolution in modes of explanation which the logic of facts had wrought, and we find him saying (p. 16) that "of many important facts which come under the consideration of geologists the 'Deluge' is,
ofperhaps, the most remarkable; and it is established by such clear and
positive arguments that if any one point natural history may be considered as proved, the Deluge must be admitted to have happened, because it has left full evidence in plain and characteristic e:fl'ects upon the surface of the earth." But he proceeds to qualify this statement by the admission that organic remains "were certainly deposited in the rocks before the Deluge."
He enumerates (pp. 147, 148, 189, 190) and figures (Pl. VII, VIII) a number of Jurassic fossil . plants from what he calls the Upper Sandstone, Shale, and Coal, which have formed an interesting chapter in the history of the Mesozoic flora of the globe. Brongniart's method of arranging these vegetable remains is adopted.
Passing over the year 1830, which was characterized by considerable activity, as evinced by numerous minor papers of Brongniart, Witham, and others, we will pause to consider the most important work of this time, which began to appear in quarterly numbers in 1~31, viz., ''The Fossil Flora of Great Britain," under the happy joint editorship of Dr. John J_.~indley, the eminent botanist, and William Hutton, the equally
176Annales des sciences naturdles, Vol. XIII, p. 3:35, XIV~ p. 127, XV, pp. 4:3, 225, 435.

WARD.]

LINDLEY AND HUTTON.

409

renowned geologist. This work continued to appear until1837, when it was suspended. The whole is now bound in three shapely octavo vol umes, and forms an indispensable part ·of the library of every paleobotanist. From such an authorship was certainly to be expected a work of the highest authority and merit, and, indeed, such it really is. The illustrations are as fine as could be attained for the octavo size, and the text is both ample and accurate; but the greater part of the introductory remarks in Volume I, as well as much of the general dis-. cussion throughout the work, is characterized by a most astonishing and apparently willful ignorance of the true principles ofpaleophytology as they were set forth by Brongniart, Sternberg, and even Schlotheim. One of the most remarkable aberrations of the book is the pertinacity with which the authors contend for the existence of cactaceous and eupborbiaceous plants in the coal:..measures. It is true that Parkinson177 had seen a fancied resemblance between certain stems and those of large cacti, and several similar guesses had been made by early authors,178 who supposed they must find the counterpart of every fossil in the living flora, but all these imaginings had been long since laid aside only to be revived by the leading botanist of Europe.
The theory of a former tropical climate in England and temperate Europe ·is assailed, the existence of tree ferns in the Carboniferous is denied, and the relation of Calamites to the Equisetacem doubted, while to the now somewhat waning doctrine of atmospheric changes " much more probability is attached." The true secret of this sweeping skepticism is, however, not far to seek. It is found in the more general . denial which is finally made of the conclusion to which an admission of these rejected theories would naturally lead, and had actually led lVI. Bronguiart and others. The authors say: "Of a still more questionable character is the theory of progressive development, as applied to the
state of vegetation in successive ages * * * in the vegetable king-
dom, it cannot be conceded that any satisfactory evidence has yet been produced upon the subject; on the contrary, the few data that exist, appear to prove exactly the contrary." All the denial~ and assertions contrary to Brongniart's teachings are made to support this view. The existence of Cactacem, Euphorbiacem, and other Dicotyledons in the Carboniferous would negative development; the existence of a former tropical climate was a strong argument for the nebular hypothesis as well as for geologic progress; tree-ferns would argue such a former tropical climate; if Calamites could be shown to be a Juucus (Vol. I, p. xxx), a higher type would be found in Paleozoic strata and another point gained. Still another good point was thought to be gained by proving what is now admitted, that Coniferous plants occur in the coal. All botanists proper then held, as many still hold, that the Gymnosperms were a

177 Organic Remains, Vol. I, pp. 430, 439, Pl. V, Fig. 8, Pl. IX, Fig. 10. 178 Volkmann. Silesia subterranea, p.l06; Walch, Naturgeschichte der Vcrsteinerungen, Tab. Xa, Xb, Xc.

410

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

subclass of the Dicotyledons, co-ordinate with the dicotyledonous Angiosperms. But, curiously enough, Brongniart had forestalled this argument by making the Gymnosperms of lower type, intermediate between the Oryptogams and the angiosperlllous Pllanerogams. By a special insight, characteristic of true scientific genius, he had used their lower geological position as .a partial proof ·of their lower organization,
e.,i. had postulated evolution as an ai(~ to organic research-a method
which is now becoming quite common, although unsafe except in the · bands of a master.
Much stress is laid upon the fact "that uo trace of any glumaceous plant has been met with, even in the latest Tertiary rocks," the authors thus freely employing the fallacy which theyelsewhere warn others to avoid, that because a class of plants has not been found, therefore it did not exist in a given formation. But to cut off the possibility of a reply to the position they take they :finally declare that, "supposing that Sigillarias and Stigmarias could really be shown to be cryptogamic . plants, and that it could be absolutely demonstrated that neither Coniferoo nor any other dicotyledonous plants existed in the :first geological age of land plants, still the theory of progressive development would be untenable, because it would be necessary to show that Monocotyledons are inferior in dignity, or, to use a more intelligible expression, are less perfectly formed than Dicotyledons. So far is this from being the case that if .exact equality of the two classes were not admitted, it would be a question whether Monocotyledons are not the more highly organized of the two; whether palms are not of greater dignity than oaks, and Cerealia than nettles." · Teleologic and anthropocentric reasoning like this pervades all the discussions in the work and largely vitiates the scientific deductions. The elaborate experiment of Dr. Lindley, described in the first dozen pages of the third volum~, was obviously animated by the same spirit of uncompromising hostility to · the development hypothesis that inspired the vagaries that characterize the introduction to the :first volume. By showing that the higher types of plants when long immersed in water are earlier decomposed than ferns, conifers, and palms, be thought he had demonstrated that the reason why we :find no Dicotyledons in the Carboniferous is simply because they had not resisted, and from their nature could not resist, the destructive agencies to be overcome in the process of petrifaction. One could wish that he might look down upon t.he four thousand species of fossil Dicotyledons now known, and realize how vain had been his experiment as well as all his former theorizing.
One work of special interest and value appeared in 1832, "Die Dendrolithen in Beziehung auf ihren inneren Ban," by C. Bern hard Cotta.
-This was a renewed attempt to classify systematically and describe
scientifically the various kinds of fossil wood that had been discovered. Following in the footsteps of Sprengel, but provided with far more and better material, Cotta made a special study of the internal structure of

W.ARD. ]

CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES.

411

all the trunks and stems in his collection, establishing new genera and species based thereon, some of which are still accepted, as, e. g., Psaronius. He reduces the forms in which all vegetable remaim; occur to three general classes, viz., (1) mere impressions without any remnant of the original cause; (2) petrifactions proper, in which the original substance is replaced with precision by the particles which were in the solution in which the plant was immersed; and (3) true vegetable remains whose substance · is still present though somewhat metamorphosed, as, e. g., lignite. This classification may be profitably compared with that of Schultze, in the work which has already been noticed.I79 His Dendrolithen embrace more than did Sprengel's Psarolithi, and aimed to include all the objects of this general class with which he wa8 acquainted.
Witham's "Internal Structure of Fossil Vegetables" (supra, p. 373), appeared in 1833, and is the mo8t exhaustive treatise thus far produced on the histology of paleobotany. He was evidently unacquainted with Cotta's "Dendrolithen," and, so far as the work itself would indicate, with Sprengel's "De Psarolithis." He confined his investigations entirely to British fossils, to which be is able in most cases to apply the systematic names giYen by Brongniart and Lindley and Hutton. The classification adopted is that of Brongniart. He makes his study comparative, and devotes two plates to the illustration of the structu·re of various kinds of wood of living trees.
One other important work appeared in 1833, viz., Zenker's '' Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte der Urwelt," 180 which, while describing animal remains from several localities and horizons, devotes 23 of its 67 pages, and three of the six plates to the description and illustration of theremarkable Cretaceous plant beds of Blankenburg in the Harz district. This memoir is remarkable for being the first attempt systematically to treat dicotyledonous fossils, and notwithstanding the adverse fate which has overtaken nearly all the names given at that and earlier periods to plants of all kinds, Zenker's genus, Credneria, still stands, and seems likely to stand much longer, if not perpetually. Though less well known than the <Eningenleaf-prints, th!s locality was known to Scheuch· zer, Briickmann, and Walch, but its systematic study as well as the initial step in the investigation of dicotyledonous fossil plants was re· served for Zenker in the second quarter of the nineteenth century.
The year 1834 would be sufficiently memorable in the annals of paleobotany if it had witnessed nothing more than the appearance of the first memoir 181 relating to the subject, from the pen of Doctor Heinrich

1i 9 Knrtze Betrachtung derer Krauterabdriicke im Steinreiche, pp. 7-9. teo Jonathan Carl Zenker. Beitrage zur Naturgeschichte der Urwelt, etc. Jena, 1833. 181 Ueber die Bestrebungen der Schlesier die Flora der Vorwelt zu erlautern. Schlesische Provincialblatter, August und September, 1834. Also in Karsten undDechen's Archiv, Band VIII, 1835, pp. 232-249.

412

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY

Robert Goppert, of Breslau, whose career we have already briefly sketched, and whose death since the first draft of that sketch was made occasioned an unavoidable shock notwithstanding the ripened age which our biographic notice showed him to have attained (supra, p. 373).
No important works on fossil plants appeared in 1835, and the principal production of 1836; in this line of research, was Goppert's "Systema Filicum Fossilium," 182 which had probably been in preparation for many years. It was a masterly effort and fittingly betokened the great career of its author. The historical introduction remains the best review of paleobotanical science that has ever been written, and shows that. the literature of the subject had long been a favorite pursuit of Dr. Goppert. Nearly all the :figures ·of fossil ferns that had been drawn by the early authors were discussed and identified by the light of more recent knowledge. Rigid comparisons were instituted between fossil and living species, and systematic descriptions of the former so far as then known were introduced.· In the forty-four plates that accompany the work are figured most of the Silesian species, which the author declares to be more numerous than those of any other country.
Goppert's contributions during the next year (1837) were numerous 183 and important, and, taken with the equally valuable ones of Brongniart,184 render this year a good one for their branch of science.
The year 1838 was still more fruitful in published results, as man)- as a dozen memoirs having been produced in Europe. One of the UIOSt important of these baR already been mentioned185 (supra, p. 380), in which the :first serious attempt was made to determine dicotyledonous genera by the ·aid of the nervation of their leaves.
In this year also appeared the eighth number of Sternberg's" Flora der Vorwelt," containing Corda's "Skizzen zur vergleichenden Phytotomie vor- unrl jetztweltlichen Pflanzen," whose merits have already been referred to (supra, p. 371).
The year1839 produced the :first contributions of both Geinitz (supra, p. 374) and Binney,186 thus adding two important names to the roll of colaborers in this :field. The Count of Munster's "Beitrage zur Petre-

182 Systema Filicum Fossilium: Die Fossilen Farnkrauter. Nov. Act. Acad. Caes. Leop. Car., Tom. XVII, Suppl., pp. 1-76.
183 Uebersicht der bis j etzt bekannten fossilen Pflanzen. In Germar's H andbuch der Mineralogie, 1837.
Idern. Two papers on fossil wood : Neues J abrbuch fiir Mineralogie, 1B37, p. 40:3,
{ a nd Verhandl. d . schles. Gesell., 1837, pp. 68-76; and an important one on the process of petrifaction: Poggendorf's Annalen, Band XLII, 1837, S. 593. 184 Comptes Rencius: Paris, 1837, Tome V, p. 403; Proc. verb. de la soc. philom., 1837, p. 99; Mem. de l'Acad. Roy., TomeXVT, 1838, p. 397. 185 Snl sistema vascolare delle foglie, considerato come carattere distintivo per la determina.zione delle filliti. N. Ann. d. Sc. Nat. Bologna, 1838. Ann. I, Tom. I , pp. 343-390, Pl. VII-XIII. 186 "On a microscopic vegetable skeleton found in peat, near Gainsborough." British Association Report, 1839 (Part II), pp. 71, 72.

WARD. ]

CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES.

413

factenkunde" also began to appear in that year, to which several of the most prominent German paleobotanists contributed.
Three very important works appeared in 1840. Bowerbank's " Fossil Fruits and Seeds of the London Clay" 187 marked a great advance in the state of knowledge of the remarkable bodies studied by him, and which, since Parsons188 called attention to them in 1757, and in fact for many years previous to that time, bad excited the intere8t of both the learned and the unlearned. Of these remarkable forms Bowerbank established ten genera, all but two of which (Higbtea and Cucumites) are accepted by Schimper in his "Traite de paleontologie vegetale." The number of species distinguished is quite large, and the descriptions and illustrations are very thorough and exact. The work is intensely scientific, and the reader is rarely referred to other authors or to any of the collateral circumstances that would have so greatly aided him in understanding it properly. Exact localities are rarely given, though the island of Sheppey seems to have furnished a large share of the specimens.
The work of Steininger,189 treating of the fossil plants of what he designates as the "pfii.lzisch-saarbriickische Steinkohlengebirge," may next be mentioned, in which 83 species of coal plants are described, with 17 illustrations. The work, however, is chiefly geognostic.
Rossmassler's treatise on the lignitic sandstone about A1tsattel in Bohemia,190 almost marks an epoch in the science of fossil plants from the resolute, and in many respects, successful manner in which the author attacks the problem of dicotyledonous leaves, which had thus far been regarded as beyond the power of science to harmonize with the living flora. He clearly realized the objections to the use of Sternberg's uni- · versal genus Phyllites for all plants of this class, and in stating these objections he says, among other things, that in the great quantity of leaves that will be distinguished in the course of careful investigations of Tertiary strata the species of this vague genus Phyllites cannot fail to increase so enormously that all resources for deriving specific names will be exhausted. He first proposed to himself to determine the true genera t.o which the leaves seemed to belong, and then to append the old name phyllites to these genera, as, e. g., Leuco-phyHites, Daphno-phyllites, etc.; but the fear of responsibility, the comparatively unimportant and local character of his work, and the advice of friends deterred him from car-

187 James Scott Bowerbank. A History of the Fossil Fruits and Seeds of the London Clay. London, 1840.
188 James Parsons. An Account of some Fossils and other Bodies found in the Island of Shepey. Phil. Trans., 1757, Vol. L, pp. 2, 396.
189 J. Steininger. Geognost.ische Beschreibung des Landes zwischen der unteren Saar und dem Rheine. Ein Bericht an die Gesellschaft niitzlicher Forschungen zu Trier. Trier, 1840.
190 E. A. Rossmassler. Beitra.ge >mr Versteinerungskunde. Erstes Heft. Die Versteiuerungen des Braunkohlensandsteins, aus der Gegend von Altsattel in Bohmen. Dresden und Leipzig, 1840.

414

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

rying out his plan and decided him to employ under strong protest the old name. He described forty-eight Phyllites, all of which are so admirably figured as regards nervation that it has been no trouble for later writers to refer them to their proper genera. He also describes ~t palm (Flabellaria), several cones of Pinus, and a coniferous stem that he mistook for Stigmaria, though it is due to him to say that he recognized the entire novelty of finding a Stigmaria in the Tertiary formation.
In addition to these and some minor contributions during the year 1840, it was, as already shown, the one in which the earliest papers of both Unger 191 aud Schimper 192 on fossil plants made their appearance.
The principal contribution inade iu 1841 was GopperUs '' Gattungen der Fossilen Pfianzen," 193 which appeared originally in six parts, with German and French text and many plates. It embraces a fundamental discussion of ·the existing knowledge of fossil plants. It must not be supposed that it is confined to the description of generic characters. The characteristic species of each genus are fully portrayed. The author still clings to the ancient floras, chiefly to the Carboniferous. The work has an unfinished appearance, and the parts have been put together by the publishers in a most slovenly manner, which, however, should not be allowed to-detract from the true merits, as it certainly does from the usefulness, of this work.
A number of other papers by Goppert must be credited to 1841, the most important of which was his" Fossile Flora des Qnadersandsteins von Scblesien," 194 which he supposed to belong to the Tertiary system, while in connection with Beinert he published in the same year a memoir on the distribution of fossil plants in the Carboniferous formation.195
The little work of Alexander Petzholdt, ''De Oalamitis et .Lithanthracibus" (Dresdre et Lipsire, 1841), possesses merits not to be measured by its size. It bas done much to clear up both subjects, and also to advance them, and the collection given of opinions which have been expressed by those best situated to know respecting the nature of the Calamitre, and especially respecting the origin of coal, must continue to

191Supra, p. 375, note 9. 192 Baumfarne, Schachtelhalrrie, Cycadeen, Aethophyllum, Albert.ia * if * im lmnten Sandstein der Vogeseli; Hysterium auf einem Pappel-Blatte der Wetterauer Braunkohle. Lon hard und Bronn's Neue Jahrbiicher, 1840, pp. 336-338. Communication dated 14. Marz, 1840. 193 Die Gattuugeu der fossilen Pflanzen verg1ichen mit denen der Jetztwelt und durch Abbildungen erlautert (Les genres des plantes fossiles compares avec ceux du monde moderne expliques par des figures). Bonn, I-IV. Lfg., 1841, V-VI. Lfg., 18421845. 194 Ueber die fossile Flora der. Quadersandsteinformation in Schlesien als erster Beitrag zur Flora der Tertiargebilde. Nov. Act. Acad. C:es. Leop. Tom. XXIX, 1841r p. 97. 190 Goppert & Beinert. Ueber Verbreitung der fossiler G.ewachse in der Steinkohlenformation. Karsten & Dechen's Archiv., Band XV, 1841, p. 731.

WARD.]

CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES.

415

have great historical value. As much may also be said for still another book of Petzholdt, published the same year, "De Balano et Calamosyringe (Additamente ad Palreologiam).
Although the first number of Unger's "Chloris Protogrea" appeared in 1841, still the work was not published until six years later, and contains preliminary matter of later origin and of such moment as to render it more proper to speak of the work as a whole in the chronological order of its final publication.
In 1842 numerous papers relating to fossil plants appeared in the current periodicals by Binney, Goppert., Gutbier, Kutorga, Unger, and others, all contributing to swell the literature of the science and supply the data for future generalization. Mr. v'lilliamson's paper before the British Association of'that year on the origin of coal (supra, p. 376) has already been referred to as a landmark to indicate the point of time at which he joined the growing band of workers in this field. Miquel's monograph of the Cycadacere,I96 although dealing chiefly in the living forms, takes account also of the fossil cycads, and forms a contribution to the subject that was much needed in its day. In Vanuxem's "Geology of New York," which forms Part III of the "Natural History of New York" (Albany, 1842), occur numerous figures of fossil plants, with some general remarks thereon.
Some dozen or more memoirs on fossil plants appeared in 1843, the most important of which were by Roemer 197 and Parlatore.198 The first edition of Morris's "Catalogue of British Fossils" 199 (including fossil plants) also appeared in that year.
The number of contributions to the science of fossil plants in 1844 was considerably larger than in the previous year. It includes Schimper and Mougeot's H Monographic des plantes fossiles du gres bigarre de la Chaine des Vosges," a work of considerable importance. In it are described and figured species of .lEthophyllum, of surprising form and perfection, also YuccUes and other of the most ancient monocotyledonous types; Albertias, Voltzias, Schiz oneuras, and Ferns.
Numerous short papers by Goppert relate to the lignite beds, and
show that he was working up towards the subject of amber inclusions, which were soon to engross his attention; and one of these relates to th~ existence of amber in his own country,200 and gives an historical ac-

196 J•'. A. G. Miquel. Monographia Cycadearum. Trajecti ad Rheum. Fol. cum 8 tab.
197 Friedrich Adolph Roemer. Die Versteinerung des Harzgebirges. Hanover, 1843, 4to.
1!!8 Filippo Parlatore. Intorno ai vegetali fossili di monte Bamboli e di monte Massi. Atti d. Georgofili d. Firenze, Vol. XXI, pp. 1-83. Firenze, 1843.
199 JohnMorris. A Catalogue of British Fossils, comprising genera and species hitherto described with references to their geological distribution and to the localities in which they have been found. London, 1843. Second edition, considerably enlarged. London, 1854.
200 Ueber das Vorkommen des Bernsteins in Schlesien. Uebersicht d. schles. Gesell.,
1844, s. 228.

•I

416

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

count of its discovery there, with a list of all the localities known to him.

Besides giving a summary of the fossil flora of Silesia, in Wimmer's

'-'Flora von Schlesien" (Breslau, 1844), Goppert prepared a laborious

statistical paper 201 on the condition of the science at that date, which

is highly interesting to consult now. The whole number of species then

known to him was 1,778, of which 927 were vascular Cryptogams and

242 Gymnosperms.

Germar's great work on the Carboniferous flora of W ettin and Lobe-

jtin 202 began to appear in 1844 and continued in parts until 1853.

Though treating of all the forms of life found in this district, the work

is necessarily devoted mainly to plants, and the large folio plates display

great thoroughness of treatment. To Dr. Andra is due considerable of

the text.

Probably no year since 1828 was more fruitful of results in paleo-

botanr than 1845, and no year since bas exceeded it, if we only speak

relatively to the state of the science. Two of the greatest American con-

tributors, Lesquereux 2c3 and Dawson (supr a, p. 377, note 15), entered the

ranks at this point, although their first papers gave little earnest of

their future career. Besides some twenty ·minor papers and several

small monographs and memoirs of permanent value, we have four large

and important works that were either finished or well begun and fairly

before the public on that year. Upon the first class we have here no

space for comment. Among those of the second may :first be mentioned

Kurr's memoir on the Jurassic flora of Wiirttemberg, 204 in which some

dozen new species of Coniferre, ferns, and lower Cryptogams are figured.

His supposed discovery of true dicotyledonous (cupuliferous) wood has

( not been verified.

·

Two papers by Goppert are worthy of mentiou, one describing fossils

from the coal measures of Siberia, collected by M. P. de Tchihatche:ff,
and published by that traveler in his "V:oyage dans l'Alta'i," 205 with

eleven plates, and one on the fossil flora of the . middle Jura of Upper

Silesia.206

201 Ueber den gegenwartigen Zustand der Kenntniss fossiler Pflanzen, 1844. Leonh.

u. Bronn's Neues Jahrbuch, 1840, S. 405.

202 Ernst Friedrich Germar. Die Versteinerungen des Steinkohlengebirges von Wet-

tin u. Lobejtin im Saalkreise. (Petrificata stratorum litbanthracilm Wettini et Lobe-

juni in circulo Salsae reperta.) Halle, 1844-'53, fol. (Printed in German and Lat_in ).

~o.T " Quelques r echerches sur les marais tourbeux en general. " Memoires de la

Societe des sciences naturelles de Neucbatel, Tome III, 1845.

20-1 Johann Gottlob Kurr. Beitrage zur fossilen Flora der Juraformation Wiirttem-

• bergs. Stuttgart, 1845 (Einladungsscbrift zu der Feier des Geburtsfestes Sr. Majestat

Wil!Jelm von Wiirttemberg in der konigl. polytechnischen Schule zu Stuttgart den

27. September, 1845).

·

205 Description des vegetaux fossiles recueillis par M. P. de Tchihatcheff en Siberie,

tmduit du manuscrit allema.nd par P. de Tchibatch eff et publie dans son" Voyage

sciei:ttifique dans 1'Altai Ori ental et les partiE's adj acentes de la frontiere de laChine,

pages 379 a 390, plancbes 25 a 35.

.

206 Ueber die fossile Flora der mittleren Juraschichten in Oberschlesien. Uebersicht

der schles. Gesellsch. 1845, p. 139.

J··

WAHD .)

CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES.

417

Adolphe Brongniart named the fossil plants of Murchison's Geology

of Russia 207 and published an explanatory letter.
One other paper of the minor class may be mentioned, chiefly because it descr~bes American material, viz., that of Dr. James Hall in his report

upon the vegetable remains collected by Fremont's expedition in 1842.208 Eleven species of fossil plants are described in this report, besides the

figure (Pl. II, Fig. 4), and mention of a dicotyledonous leaf, which last

diagnosis is undoubtedly in so far correct. The determination of the

ferns is also correct, except in the case of his Glossopteris Phillipsii

(Pl. II, Figs. 5, 5a, 5b, 5c), which is not a ·fern but another dicotyledonous
plant, as may be seen by the secondary veins and the absence of the character~.stic forked nervation of Glossopteris. In these and other re-

spects these figures·do not agree with those·ofBrongniart ('' Hist. veg.

foss''., Pl. 61, bi-s Fig. 5) and Phillips(" Geol. Yorkshire," Pt. I, Pl. VIII, Fig. 8). This is not the· place to enter into the diagnosis and ·state·the
true affinities ·or these leaves, and indeed · from the :figures alone this

would be a somewhat hazardous task; as yet only a few ·of the types

figured are in·my bands, and of this ' species only one of the least per-

fect specimens,-but this and other· unpgured fragments fully confirm its

reference to the Dicotyledons. · Of the ·geological position of the locality

from which this material was derived one ca·n perhaps speak with

greater certainty. · It is at ·least certain that it is not Oolitic, as Dr.HaH

supposed, and it is probably Cretaceous, perhaps Laramie group. If the

latitude and longitude (lat. 412-o, long. 1l10) were accurately 'taken this
would make Muddy Creek atributary of the Bear Ri:v·er at a point which

is colored as Cretaceous on the new map of the'United States Geological Survey prepared by Mr; W. J. McGee (1884). · The report will at least

serve to direct attention to this locaJity.

·

· Among ·the larger works that appeared in 1845, we ·will first mention

Unger's "Synqpsis Plantarum Fossilium," which is a carefully-prepared

catalogue of aU the fossil plants known to him with references to the

works in which first described. The orders and genera are briefly char-

acterized, and the localities are stated for the species. At the end is a

suinmary, from whicq we learn that he had been able to enumerate

1,648 species. This, as will be remembered, is 130 species Jess than

Goppert had enumerated a year earlier. It probably was, however, a

closer approximation to the true state of the science. A complete index

and a good bibliograplly rendered tlle work convenient for reference,

and we can readily imagine its extreme usefulness at that date.

Probably the most important work of this year was Corda's "Flora

207Geologie de la Russie d'Europe et des montagnes de l'Oural, par Roderick Impey Murchison, Edouard de Verneuil, et le Comte Alexandre de Keyserling. Londres et Paris, 1845, Tome If, pp. 1-13.
208 Report of the Exploring Expedition to the Rocky Mountains in the year 1842, and to Oregon and North Ca.lifornia in the years 1843-'44. By Capt. J. C. Fremont, Wash· ington, 1845, pp. 30!-307, plates I and II.
GEOL 84--27

418

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

der Vorwelt." 209 It is a large work in folio, with 128 pages of text and sixty magnificent plates, chietly devoted to the illustration of the internal structure of petrified and carbon~ed trunks in various families of the Yegetable kingdom and at different geological horizons, but mainly in the Carboniferous. As the only considerable work on this subject since Witham's (supra, p. 373), it was as much superior to that work as the aids to research were greater -than they had been twelve years earlier.
In the same year also appeared Reuss's '' Versteinerungeu der bohmiscben Kreideformation," to which Corda contributed· the fossil pla.nts in a chapter of sixteen quarto pages, with six plates executed with the same care and thoroughness that.is characteristic of all his work.
One other masterly production, viz., Goppert's Amber~Flora, in Beremlt's great work.on-amber,210 will conclude the enumeration for the year 1845. His prolonged investigations into the lignite beds of Europe and his study of the amber found in Silesia naturally led to this broader undertaking and fittingly prepared him for it. He begins with a chapter' on the amber tree. Of this be remarks that the pieces of wood that occur in and along with amber bear so close a resemblance to the specimens of lignite in his collection, that he does not for a moment hesitate, at least provisionally, to express the opinion that the.amber of Prussia is probably derived from one species, which, from its similarity to the Coniferrn of the present epoch, he refers to the extinct genus Pinites, and which he designates as Pinites succinifer, and fully characterized in the systf'matic part .of the work. This follows, beginning_with a list of the species thus far found in amber, of which he enumerates fiftythree. He finds six other species of Pinites and twenty of Coniferrn. There are ten cellular plants (chiefly mosses and Hepaticrn), one fern, one gnetaceons species (Ephedrites), and twenty-one true Dicotyledons. The descriptions come next, and are accompanied by appropriate and very elaborate illustrations.
Very little idea of the true geologic age of these fossils is derivable from any of the statements contained in this work, either by Goppert or Be1·endt, and it is still quite the practice to refer these forms to the amber simply, without further attempt to fix their position. But in a paper read before the Silesian Society, May 11, 1853, Dr. Goppert expressed himself very clearly on this point. He said: ''The manner in which this flora is composed, as well as the complete absence of one tropical or even subtropical form, points to the modern ag-e of the amber formation, which we must unquestionably refer to the late~t strata of the Tertiary formation, to the .Pliocene divi~ion." 211 By this time the

~09 Beitdige znr Flora der Vorwelt, von August Joseph Corda, mit secllszig Tafeln

Abbildungen. Prag., 1845.

·

210 Georg Carl Berendt. Die jm Bernstein befindlichen organisehen RPste dt>r Vor-

welt. Erster Band, Berlin, 1845. I. Abtheilung: Der Bernstein und die in illm be-

findlichen P.flanzenreste der Vorwelt (chiefly by Goppert).

211 Ja.hresbericht d. Schles. Gesellschaft flir va.terlandische Cultur, 1853 (Breslau,

1854), pp. 46-62, (seep. 373).

WARD.]

CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES.

419

amber flora had greatly increased, and 163 species are enumerated in this paper. This result was, however, in the main achieved through the indefatigable labors of Dr. Goppert.
In strong contrast with 1845 stands the next year, at least as regards the importance of the works _produced relating to fossil plants. Dunker's monograph of the Wealden 212 is perhaps the leading colltribution of 1846, and this embraces all departments of paleontology for that group. But the plants form a prominent feature. Fifty species of Wealden plants are enumerated as having been thus far found in Germany and England, nearly all of which are described and figured. In this last respect Dunker's work is all of a high order, which is nowhere more strongly displayed than in the treatise under consideration.
Goppert's papers were numerous in 1846, and at least one" Ueber die fossile Flora der Grauwacke oderdes Uebergangsgebirges ",213 contained the germ of one of his future great works.214
Heer 215 and Bunbury (supr.a, p. 379, note 19) both commenced in 1846 to write on fossil plants.
The only great work devoted to paleobotany _that appeared in 1~47 was Unger's "Chloris Protogrna," 216 wJ:tich, as already stated, was published m en numBers, e rs of which <'arne out in 1841. In the course of the preparation of these numbers his "Synopsis plantarnru fossilium'' appeared, which we have already noticed. The entire matter of this little work was introduced bodily, and apparently unchanged, into the larger one, forming its second part. The first part, or introduction, is. entitled "Skizzen einer Geschichte der Vegetation der Erde." This is an. able discussion of the leading problems as they presented themselves at that time and went far toward the solution of some of them. The body of the work is strictly flescriptive, and here we find 120 sp.ecies. characterized, all new to science or consisting of corrected determinations of other authors. What specially distinguishes this work, however, from all that have·thus far been reviewed is the very large percentage of dicotyledonous species, mostly from Parschl ug, embraced in these descriptions. Considerably o-\rer one-half of the number belong to this. subclass and to such genera as Ulmus, Alnus, Betula, Quercus, Acer, Rhus, Platanus, Ceanothus, Rhamnus, etc. He seems to hav;e reached his determinations of these genera by an intuitive perception of the general and special resemblances of the fossil to the living leaves, with

. 2t2 Wilhelm Dunker. Monographie derNorddeutschen Wealdenbildung. Ein Beitrag zur Geognosie und Naturgeschichte der Vorwelt. Braunschweig, 1846.
213Uebersicht der Arbeiten der schlesien Gesellschaft., 1846, pp. 178-184 (expanded in the Zeitschrift d. deutsch., geol. Gesellsch. Band III, 1B51, S. 185).
~14 Fossile Flora des Uebergangsgebirges, Nov. Act. Acad. Caes. L eop. Car. Nat . Cur.
Band XXII, Suppl. Breslau & Bonn, 1852. 2li;The first paper of which we have a record is the one "Ueber die von ihm au der
hohen Rhone entdekten fossilen Pfl:1nzen," which appeared in the Verhandlungen ;der schweizerischen Gesellschaft for 1846, pp. 35-38.
216FranzUnger: Chloris Protogrea. Beitdige znrFlora derVorwelt. Leipzig, 1847.

420

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

which, as a thorough botanist, he was perfectly familiar. He nowhere refers to·any treatise on the nervation of leaves, and as those of Bianconi (supra, p. 380, note 27) are not included in his '' Literatura nostri awi," it is probably safe to infer that he was unacquainted with them. ·In drawing his figures he adopted the old method of figuring the stone as well as all the defects in the impression, which while requiring an .immense amount of unprofitable labor, rendered the result much ess clear and less valuable than it would have been had these features been omitted. The fifty plates, h9wever, by which this work is illustr ted constitute an enduring monument to the skill, energy, and industr of their author.
Pomel's paper on the Jurassic :flora of France,'217 which appeared in the . official report of tqe association of German naturalists and physicians
for 1847,though. rtnaccoinpanied by illustrations, proved a highly im· portant co-ntribution and gave a new impetus to the study of that formation from the vegetable sjde._
Some dozen or more other memoirs of greater or less import were contributed during 1847 by Binney, 218 Fr. Braun, 219 Bunbury, 220 Goppert, 221 Lesquereux, 222 Rouillier,_223 and others, none of which _can . be specially considered here. ·
About thirty papers and . ·books, small. and great, .relating to fossil ptants appeared in 1848; none of which, however, can be ranked as great wo~·ks, unless it be Bronn's. IQ<)ex Palooontologicus,224 which merely includes the plants with all other fossils ~n one alphabetical arrangement. T1;w numper, however, of what .may .be classed as .second-rate -productions was_ quite large. Among the_se we may count Unger's ~ 'Flora von Parschl~g," 225 Berger's thesis" De fructibus et-seminibus

217M. A. Pomel. Amtlicher Berlclit der Versammlnng der deutschen Naturforecher

und Aertzte, 1847, pp. 33Z-354. ·

··

·.

218 Phil. Mag. Vol. XXXI, 1847, p. 259.

219Fried.rich B.raun. Die fossilen Gewachse aus den Granzschichten zwischen dem

Lias und Keuper des neu aufgefum1eneu Pflanzenlagers in.dem Steinhruche von Veit-

lahm bei Culmbacb. Flora, Regensburg, 1847, p. 81. (Eimmerates 57 speciesofRbe-

tic plaJ;J.ts.

.·

· 220 Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, 1847, Vol. III, pp. 281, 423.

221 Uebersicht der Arbeiten d. schles. Gesellschaft, 1847, pp. 70-73.

.

22z ~xplorations clans le Nord de l'Europe pour l'etncle <l~s depOts de combustibles

mineraux. Bull. Soc. Sci. Nat. de Neuchatel, Tome I, 184i, p. 471.. Idem sur les plantes

qui forment la houille. Bihl. Univ. Archives, Tome VI, p. 158. Gene>e, 1847.

2z3 C. Rouillier. Etudes paleontologiques de Moscou, in Fischer de Walclheim's

Jubilaeum semisecularem. M:osc~m, 1847. (Bois fossiles, pp. 20-24).

224 Heinrich G. Bronn. Handbucb einer Geschichte der Natnr. III. Band., III.

Theil. Organisches Leben. Index Palreontologicus, o<ler Uebersicht der bis jetzt be-

kannten fossilen Organismen. Stuttgart, 1848-1t!49. A. Nomenclator palreontologi-

cus, 184B. B. Enumerator palreontologicue, 1849.

225 Die fossile Flora von Parschlng. Steiermarckische Zeitschrift, IX. Jahrg., I.

Heft. 1848.

_..- ''

WARD.)

CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES.

421

ex formatione -lithanthracuin,'' 226 Binney "On the origin of coal,227 three

consecutive 'papers by Dr. J; D. Hooker in the lVIeriwirs of the Geologi-

cai Survey of Great Britain, 228 Debey, on the fossil plants of Aa:chen, 229

Goppert's prize essay ori the formation of ·coal, 230 Rat1lin's " :Flore de

!'Europe pendant la periode tertiaire, 231 Robert Brown's memoir on Triplosporites~ 232 really· announcing the discovery ofthe frnit ofLepidoden-

dron, and _Sauveur's "Vegetaux fossiles de Belgique." 233 - These works
were all important additions to the literature 'of the 'scieilce, and rep-

resented a ·iarge aniount of ·original research.

·

The third volume of Bronn's Index ..Pal:Eontologicus, namely, the

E,numerator; did not appear until 1849. - It contains Goppert's table of the vegetable fossils as known ·to him, arranged under the~r respective

geological formations. - All -the species are enun:H~rate'd in systematic

order, but with a!l inconvenient appendix (pp. 5-72), and are not smnmed

up at the end. The s1,mJ.mary is, however, ·intro·duceu in anotlier- part'

of the volume (p.' 727); and shows ;thiH COllSidei•able progress· had been ma"de since 1847, ~hen Unger inade his synopsis in' his •' Chloris Pro-

togaea," although, as already remarked, the 1,648 spe'cies there given ·
inis the same as given his '' 'Synopsis i)hii1tarum fossilium" (1845),

which seems· ·116t to · have been revised, wLile ·Goppert' had already ·

enumerated in 1844 (supra, p. 416) 1'778 specieR. From these :ffgures we llOW have an ad \Tance tO 2,05~, Or more than fOUr timeS aS man~; aS Were

known to Brongniar:t in 1828, though only auout one-fourth the num-·

ber now knmvn.

Tlie great work of1849 was Brorigriiart's "Tableau des genres de vegetaux fossih~s." 234 The author's vi'ews relating to the classification and

226 Reinhold Berger. De fi'uctilms et seminilms ex formatione lithanthracum. Dis-

sertatio inauguralis qu'am consensu ct auctoritate amplissimi philosophorurn ordinis

in alma Htterarum uuiversitate viadrina ad summas in philosophia boupres rite capes-

sendos die XVIII; M. Decembris, A. MDCUCXLVIII. H. L._Q. S. publice defendet

AuctoL Vratislavi re, 1848.

227 Memoirs of the _Literary and Philosophical ~ociety of :Manchester, Vol. VII£,

1848, p. 148.

22s Vol. ·II, pp. 2-45ft

229 Verhandlungen des naturhistorischen vereines der preussishen Rheinlande, V.

Jahrg., 1tH8, pp. 113, 126.

230 Preisschrift. Abhandl ung, eingesandt als Antwort auf diePreisfrage: * * *

ob die Steinkohlenlager aus Pflanze11 entstanden sind, etc. Eine mit dem doppelten

Preise gekronte Schrift. Haarlem, H148, 4°, 300 S, 23 Taf. , forming the 4e Deel,

Tweede versameling, Verhantll. Holl. Maatschappen.

·

n 1Victor Raulin. Sur les transformations de la flore de l'Europe centrale pendant

la periode tertiaire. Annales des sciences natiuelles de Paris, 3e serie, Botanique,

Tome X, 1848, p. 193.

232 Annals and Magazine of Natural History, ser. II, Vol I, 1848, p. :~76; Proc. Linn.

Soc. I, 1849, p. 344; Trans. Linn. So.;.; Vol. XX, Pt: I, 1851, p. 469, Pl. XXIII, XXIV.

Cf. Comtes rendus des seances de l'Academie des scienJ.Ces, Tome 67, 1868, pp. 421-426.

233 J. Sauveur. Vegetaux fossiles .des terrain~ houillers de la Belgique, Academie

royale des sciences, des lettres, et des beaux-arts de Belgique, Tome XXII, 1848.

'I 234 Tableau des genres de vegetaux fossiles considere sons le point de vue de leur classification botanique et de leur distribution geologique. Paris, 1849, 8°. Diction-

I naira universeI d'histoire naturelle.

422

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

distribution of the extinct genera and species of fossil plants are here

systematically set forth and superbly illustrated. A memoir on the

same subject235 appeared in the "Annales des sciences natnrelles" for the

same year, in a manner summarizing his views and giving lists of fossil

plants belong·ing to each horizon. . In seeking to avoid all duplications

that result from giving different names to different parts of the same

plant, his enumeration is reduced to very modest proportions and

falls inside of 1,600 species, while, by treating ffiningeri and Parschlug

as Pliocene instead of Miocene, he greatly exaggerates thP. importance

of the former horizon at the expense of the latter. But the era of

Miocene exploration had only just begun, and that formation did not

give eYidence of its present overshadowing sripremacy until the labors

of Heer and Ettingshausen began to reveal its true character. .

Pattison's ''Chapters on Fossil Botany'' 236 is a very superficial at-

tempt to treat the subject in a popular way., and its. only value is a table

of British fossil plants, which, if it could be depended upon, would show

the number then known to amount to 529, of .which 279 were from the

coal measures, 120 from the Tertiary, and 89 from the Oolite.

A large number of works and memoirs on vegetable paleontology

appeared·in 1850, perhaps exceeding that of' any previous year. Most

of these, however, were of modest pretensions, and only two can prop-
erly be classed among great wor'ks Oil the subject. These were u nger's

K' "Genera et species plantar.urn fossilium" 237 and Goppert's "Mono-

11graphie der fossilen Coniferen. " 238

·

As Unger had in 1845 publ~shed, in his" Synopsis,'~ the first complete

catalogue of fossil plants, so he was the first, in 1850, to. publish a com-

plete manual on the subject, for such is the nature of his "Genera et

species.'' This work is a shapely octavo volume of 668 pages, written

wholly in Latin, and describing in systematic order every species of

fossil plant known to the author. The total number thus described

is 2,421, a large advance upon any pr:evious estimate. Among the

good features of the work · are an enumeration of the genera under

their proper orders and classes in a table that precedes the des.criptive

part, the reproduction, brought down to date, of his previously pub-

lished "Literatura nostri oovi," and a thorough species index at the

end, distinguishing synonyms by printing them in italics. In his classi-

fication he follows the natural order of development, beginning with

the lowest forms. He declines to follow the English authorities in

zao Exposition chronologique d~s periodes de vegetation et des .flores diverses qui se
sont succede a la surface de la terre. Ann. Sci. Nat. Bot., 3e ser., Tome XI, 1849,
pp. 285-:338. 236 S. R. Pattison. Chapters on Fossil Botany. I . ondon, 1849, 12mo. 237 Franz Unger. Genera et species plantarum fossilium. Sumptibus Academire
Cresarere scientiarum. Vindobonre, 1850. 238 H. R. Goppert. Monographie der fossilen Coniferen. Eine im Jahre 1849,
mit der goldenen Medaille und einer Premie von 150 Gulden gekronte Preisschrift. Leiden, 1850. Naturkundige Verhandelingen van de Hollandsche Maatschappij der
Wetenschappen te Haarlem. Tweede Verzameling, 6e Deel. Leiden, H:50.

WARD.]

CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES.

423

treating Stigmaria as a dicotyledonous plant. He places the '' Cycadeaceoo" between tue Cryptogams and the Monocotyledons, but -strangely separates them from the Coniferrn and Gnetacern, which he makes to follow the palms and precede the forms now referred to the apetalous division; though he does not recognize by special names the divisions of the Dicotyledons established by Jussieu. Still, in arranging the orders, he follows the system of A. L. de J ussieu, and not that of Adrien de J ussieu. No illustrations accompany this work.
In Goppert's "1\fonographie der fossilen Coniferen ' 1 we have another of those exhaustive works upon difficult subjects which characterize this author. When we say that it forms a quarto volume of 359 pages, with -58 plates, half of which are deYoted to the illustration of internal structure as revealed by microscopic examination, we have given but a rude iuea of the work. The first 67 pages relate entirely to living Conifers and fitly prepare the way for a thorough treatment of the fossil forms. To the treatise on fossil Donifers is prefixed an historical
introduction of·nearly a hundred pages, in which, as in the historical
introduction to his " ·Systema filicum fossilium," he marshals the literature with- great effect, and, as in the former case he found it impossible to confh1e himself to fern life, so in the present cas~ he makes it the occasion for a thorough study of the history of man's acquaintance not ·merely with coniferous fossil wood, bnt with fossil wood in general, which for ages remained the only known form of vegetable petrifaction.
·Besides the systematic descriptitm of all coniferous fos,sils known to him, the work contains a most vahmble enumeration of localities where fossil wood, beds of coal, and fossil plants in general had been found from the year 1821 to the end of 1849, arranged primarily according to their position in the geological system. It also contains an arrangement of the species of Coniferrn according to geological horizons.
The remainder of the numerous productions of the year 1850 must be passed over in silence, as their bare enumeration would consume considerable space, and without glancing at their special merits would add little to the reader's knowledge respecting them. As bas already been stated (supra, p. 379, 380) it was in 1850 that botp. Massalongo and Baron von Ettingshausen began their work in the domain of fossil plants, so that at this date po less than fourteen of those who ha.ve been mentioned as leaders of the science were living and actively engaged in extending its boundaries.

vVe have thus passed in review the literature of fossil plants from the earliest records down to the close of the first half of the nineteenth century. The plan was, and still is, to continue this survey down to the present time, though confining attention more and more, as the literature increases in volume, to the ·most ·important works. But for the present purpose the carrying out of this plan is manifm~tly impossible from consideratiOns of botll space anu of time, autl it must be postponed until tile work to which it was intended as an introduction

I

424

SKETCH OF · ·PALEOBOTANY.

shaU have been .completed.- This is -spec-ially to be regretted, . as -so little had been done down-to 1850 to develop the paleobotanical resourees of America. -It is also true that at that uate little had been done beyond the eolleetion and accumulation of data for study. · From the time when the practiee of discussing imaginary problems •vr.ithout any data fell into di~repute the opposite and far more healthful tendency to treat facts as the end .of .research chiefly prevailed; until at length, at-the time when we are compelled to close .our record,- a sufficiently -large body of facts had been brought to light, and, through the-organiziug-power of Unger, Brongniart,. and Goppert,-had been .arranged for study and comparison,to render it somewhat .-profitable ·to · speculate upon · their .probable meaning.
In the -deead-e ,that· followed some ·svch speculation was indulged in very cautiously, but this always .resulted ·in·the clearer -recognition of · the need of.stiH more -fact-s, and undoubtedly tended strongly to stimulate research. . T-hen :-~commenced ·that systematic -attack along the -whole line of-paleobotanical investigation. ·- Ettingshausen's ·system of nervation for-·the-.determination, of. dicoty1-edonous leaves may be regarded as the result of the pressure, then irresistible, for the means of identifying the -now.:vast accumulations of this important, class-of fos- sils. Heer's ·researches into- .the · fo~sil floras of Switzerland and of tiJe arctic regions, -and Lesquereux and ~ewberry's- investigations into the· Dakota, Laramie, . and -Gree-n ·River groups -of the -vV€stern United• States, together with Saporta's -" Etudes.'' in the--south of France, furnished more data than that of· all the collections p-reviously made from the later formations.
The work of exploration ·Still goes on. Saporta has elaborated the · Jurassic of France, Grand-' Eury and -Renault have thoroughly studied · the Carboniferous .of that country, as have Williamson and Carruthers · that of England. Nathorst has opened up-the subterranean -flo-ral treasures of Sweden, and Dawson those of Britis]l America,-while EngeliJardt,IIosius, Van de-r Marek, and . Schenck have continued to investigate, without exhausting, the rich· plant-beds of Germany.- · In America activity has-not diminishe~, notwithstanding the advanceu . age of both the principal cultivators of this science. Large works, which have re-' .quired ~-ears in preparation in the hands of both Lesquereux and Newberry, are either on the eve of publication orare far advanced toward completion. Professor Fontaine, of the University of Virginia, bas an important work o~ the Rbetic flora of Virginia in press, and is collecting some most interesting maferial for a second from the lower·cretaceons or upper Jurassic of the same State. Large collections have lately been made by different parties of the Unifed States Geological Survey, which are -now in hand for examinatio·n, while fresh material is daily arriving at the National Museum from all parts of the country.
Between eight and nine thousand species (~s species are made) of fossil plants are now known to science, and the time must be near at

WARD.]

NOMENCLATURE AND CLASSIFICATION.

425 .

band, if it·bas not already come,- when this wide acquaintance with the ancient floras of the -globe, if properly organized for study, will afford such aid to geological itn·e8tigation ·as to command rBcogllitiou, while the lessons which it supplies to the- botanist and the biologist will be inestimable.

VIII. NOM·ENCLATURE AND CLASSIFICATION OF ' FOSSIL PiiANTS.
Scien~e does riot ~o~sist in na~es,but .it cannot wel~ progress without them, and early in the history .of ey~!Y scie,~ce a sy~tet.n of .nomei)clatnre always arises. Again, a knowledge of, na~u_r~l. 9bjects consist.s lar-gely in a knowledge of t]J.eir relat~on.s, to obt;:tin which ~ystematic . attempts. at the.ir methodical arrangemen~ a~e among ,the first steps. Howm~er humble such efforts _may at . first -be;, ~bey nf'.vertheles~ . cons-titu~e the beginnings of scientific cla.ssification. · The. objects .m~ty be arran gee~
.de ofbefore names.are..given to them or to th~ gr,oups they .ftre seen to f.orm,
as in Bernard 'Jussieu's (}arden the Trianon. But u~ually the naming either precedes or closely ~ccompa,nie& the process of arrange-.
is. meut. · Such at least h~s been the case with fossil .plants. This fact,
· bowev~r, ·to be here considered: .· T~at ,the scie~ce of botany proper
antedated by far that of paleouotany. A few names w~re given to vegetable remains during the period. when nobody belie~ed that they
either were themselves pl_ants or represented . plants. .. The reaction from this view, which .took plfice at the·.lJeginning of the eighteenth centur~, in fayor ~f the dilttyian theory, carried its Yotaries. rp_uch toQ
far, and led them to think tbat every fossil plant. must represent some known living one. This. ~xt;e~ism bad its fitt.ing exemplifica-
tion in Sclieuchzer's now obviouslv ridiculous attempt to classify the
fossil plants of his time under th~..same r~brics as the living. plants.
The timely appearance of Tourtiefort's "Elemens de. Botanique," in 1694, ju whjch about the first real system of botanical classification
ofwas drawn np, afforded Scheuchzer the desired opportunity, .and with-
out waiting for the appearance of a second edition his "Herbarium
diluvianu.m," be hastened to arrange all his· species under Tournefort's twenty-one clas~es, and published them, in 1816, in his '' Oryctographia
Helvetire" (pp. 203-247). In spite of his zeal, however, a large residue
of unass!gned fossil plants remained as a special _:' Class unkantlicher .. Gewachsen oder dero Theilen, welche uns vori der Siindfhith ubrigge-
blieben" (p. 236). This attempt was continued in the Editio nopissima,
of the.'' Herbarium diluvianum," puulisbed in 1723 (Appendix).
In this rash scheme Scheuchzer was not followed. Lhwyd, in 1699,. had appiied the term Lithoxylon to fossil wood, which, with the exception of the impressions des~ribed by Major, mentioned on p. 389
(supra), was the only form of vegetable fossil known down to his time.

426 SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANL
Volkmann (1720) adopts this term, and also Lithophyllon, while to all impressions of leaves and fronds he gives the general name of _Lithophytes, but he goes a long way in the direction of Scheuchzer in accepting the indigenous theory (supra, p. 395). Schultze(1755) treats the whole subject of plant impressions from a strictly mineralogical point of view, designating his figures by the old indigenous names of Scheuchzer and Volkmann; but the three general classes of petrifactions which he describes without naming are of interest, as showing that he possessed a firm and rational grasp of the phenomen-a. They are: (1) Whole trees, large trunks, thick roots,. and other similar woody matters transformed into stone; (2) impressions of twigs, leaves, flowers, etc., which consist either in whole or in part of the remains of the originals in a petrified state; (3) impressions of stems, plants, and shrubs in which no trace of their formt<r partsis perceptible.
Walch (1769) was the first to ofl'er anything like a nomenclature of fossil plants, and although most of his names have now disappeared _ from .the text- books, they still served a useful purpose during a ·long embryonic period in the history of the science. He called JJetrified trunks by the terms Lithodendron and Dendrolithus ; pieces of petrified wood Lithoxylon, and also 8telechites; petrified roots, Rhizolithus. If the foss-il remains bore a sufficient resemblance to any living tree or plant, it was called by the name of that plant, with its terminal syllable changed into ites, as Daphnites, Sanclalites, etc., a ineth·od which is still extensively employed in the creation of fossil -genera of plants. Herbaceous plants were called Phytolithi, but he distinguished mere impressions of these as Phytotypolithi. Fossil leaves were Lithobiblia, Bibliolithi, or Lithophylla. Phytobiblia referred to the leaves of herbs as opposed to those of trees. He mistook the Oalamitm for great reeds, and applied to them this name, as also that of Lithocalmi, the first of which has come down to us notwithstanding the misnomer. Fossil fruits ~e denominated Oarpolitki, which is another term that has survived in the long struggle for existence.
Parkinson (1804) contented himself by giving a simple classification in English, although he refers to the Latin names which had been given to his groups by previous authors. His terminology was, (1) fossil trees; (2) fossil plants; (3) fossil roots; (4) fossil stalks; (5) fossil lea,·es; (6) fossil fruits and seed-vessels.
Steinbauer (1818) made four classes: Fossil wood (Lithoxylon)~ fossil fruits (Lithocarpi), fossil leaves (LithophyUi [sic]), and fossil flowers, of whose existence he seemed doubtful. He describes ten species, all of which be classes under the one genus, Plzytolithus. Considering the meagerness of this presentation it is somewhat surprising that Steinbauer should have actually been the first to apply specific names to fossil plants, and thus -to bring them fairly within the circle of natural history sciences. It had thus taken more than a century to complete the cycle from the attempt of Scheuchzer to apply Tournefort's classifica-

WARD.]

SCHLOTHEIM'S CLASSH'ICATION.

427

tion to fossil plants, through the " indigenous '' and "exotic" stages incident to the diluvian theory and back to this humble beginning on a true scientific basis as a systematic science, and it is properly from the appearance of this unpretentious memoir in an American scientific serial that paleobotany as a systematic branch of natural history should date (supra, p. 403).
Baron von Scblotheim, in his " Flora der Vorwelt" (1804), had made no attempt to assign names to the forms be so admirably figured, but confines. himself to questioning· and criticising the ''indigenous" and ''exotic" names which they ·had receiYed from the early authors. "If the author had established a nomenclature for the plants which he described," said Brongniart, "his work would have become the basis of all the works which have since been produced on the same subject." 239 But it was scarcely too late for him still to acquire this honor, for between this first work and the appearance of his "Petrefactenkunde" (1820) no important treatise on fossil plants other than ·Steinhauer's memoir was published, and in this s.econd work, which, as we have already seen, so far, at least, as the treatment of vegetable remains was concerned, was merely the continuation of the first which had been interrupted by political troubles, a systematic nomenclature was adopted ·and carried out in detail (supra, p. 404). He styled the entire vegetable kingdom so far as fossils are concerned, Pbytolitbes, without, however, emplo~ying as Steinhauer had done, the term Plzytolithus as a genus. Out of it be carves five classes, tbough he does not so denominate them. Under two of these larger divisions fall subordinate ones which maybe called orders the other three remaining undivided with an ordinal and even generic rank of their own. The following is the outline of Schlotheim's system:
I. Dendrolithes.240 A. Lithoxylithes. B. Lithantbracites. C. Bibliolithes.
II. Botanilithes. III. Phytotypolithes.
a.) Palmacites. b.) Casuarinites. c.) Calamites. d.) Filicites. e.) Lycopodiolithes.
f.) Poacites. IV. Carpolithes.
V. Anthotypolithes. Under his Dendrolithes and Botanilithes no species are introduced, but certain forms are described, com'pared, and discussed. Especially

239 Prodrome, p. 3. 240 The anglicized forms are here employed as Schlotheim employed the German forms: Dendrolithen, Lithoxylithen, etc.

•

428

SKE'fCH OF PALEOBOTANY:

interesting are his notes on the -Blbliolithes in which most of the dico-

tyledonous leaves, ·then known, are referred· to. Of ·Palmacites he-

de-scribes fifteen species under regular systematic names. Of Casuari-

nites he gives fise si)ecies; of Calamites, ten; of Filicites, twenty-three;

of Lycopodiolithes; five; of Poacites, four; of Oarpolithes, fifteen, and of

Anthotypolithes, one. The science of paleobotany C<?uld therefm'e start

fr-om this date with seventy-eight species 'described and figured.

Count Sternberg; iri his ''Flora der Vorwelt,""establfshed a large num-c

ber 'of genera, which he 'foun'ded upon 'the most thurongh investigation,

a large share of which have t~sisted' the 'destrtictive agencies of suhse-

qu'ent research: Aillm1g these were Lepidodendron·, Flabellm·ta, Ann·ula-

ria, Nmggerathid, and Sphenopteris. His deter'minations were modest and ·
sound; and he was ·able only 'in a few cases· to refer· the fossil forms to'·

living genera, as in COsrnun:aa, ' Asple·niurn; 'etc. Btit the tnost impor-
tatit . departure' effected in this ·. work was' iii establ~shihg .,,egetable -.

paleontology for th-e fit~s't tiine·' upon a geognostic · hasis. He assumed'

three periods of ve·getation·: (1)' an insular peribd chara-cterized by the··
agreat coal plants; (2) period charaCterized -by the predomina'nce of

cycadean types, and (3) a period introduced by fucoidali'emains and char-
acterized by dicotyledonous·forms·. ·u will be at once ·perceived that

these three periods cohes·pond substantially with the Paleozoic, Meso- ·

zo'ic, and Cenozoic a.ges of modern -geology.

.

.

Passing_over the system ·of Martins, published in 1822?41 which,

though ha-ving merits, ·bas been received 'vith less favor, w:e now come ·

to that of Brongniart, the first draft of which also appeared ·in 1822.242

lri this memoir· all fossil plants were divided ·into · four 'classes, ex-

pressly so-called, viz.; (1) stems whose internal organization is recog-- ·

nizable; (2) stems whose internal structure is not recognizaule, but

which are characterized hy their external form; (3) stenis joined to

leaves or leaves only; (4) organs of fructification. ·The first· class is

divided into Exogenites and Endogenites, having- the rank of genera.

Under tlle second clas~, besides . Calamites of Schlotheim·, Syringoden-·

dron of Sternberg-, and other g-enera, there occur for the first time the

genera Sig-illaria ·and Stigmaria. Sternberg's Lepidodendron 1s divided

into Sigillaria and Sagenaria, to the latter of which Sternberg's name,

LeP'idodendron, is now generally preferr~d. Stigmaria is the equiva-

lent of Sternberg's Variolaria. Under the third class Lycopodites is

substituted for Schlotlieim's Lycopodiolithes, Asterophyllites for his

Oas'liarinites, and Phyll-ites for his B ·ibliolithes. Schlotheim's Filicites

and Poacites are adhered to and the new g·enera, Sphenophyll-ites and

Ficoides, are established. Under the fourth class Schlotheim's two

genera, Oarpolithes and Antholithes, are retained.

241 C. F. Martins. De pla.ntis nonnnllis antediluvianis ope speciernm inter tropicos viventium illustrandis. Denkschr. der konigl. baierisch. botan. Gesellsch. in Regensburg, Band II, 1822, pp. 121.:.147, Pl. I and II.
242 Memoires du Museum d'histoire nat.nreJle, Paris, Tome VIII, 1822, pp. 20~-210.

WARD.]

BRONGNIART'S CLASSIFICATION.

429

Without further discussipg here the beautifully illustrated work of Artis (supra, p. 406) who att~mpted, for the most part unsuccessfully, to create several new genera, we may_now profitably compare the method just reviewed with the one put forth six years later by the same author in his· "Prodrome." · On page 9. of that work he gives the key to his new_classification in the following words: "La methode quenous avons
adoptee pour classer et denominer ces fossiles, est fondee egalement sur ces rapprochements plus on moins intimes entre les plantes fossiles et les plantes vivantes." Laying aside the former method, based chiefly
e.,upon the nature of the fossil, i. the part of the plant which hap-
pened to be preserved, he now makes bold to assign aU these forms to some of the great natu-ral divisions of the vegetable kingdom as established by the Jussiens and other bQtanists. But as already remarked (supra, p. 406), geognostic considerations and· a firm·faith in the laws of development led him to suggest some important modifications in this so-called natural method, as may be seen by comparing the following scheme from page 11 of the "Prodrome" and from ·page 20 of the "Histoire des vegetaux fossiles":
I. Agams. II. Cellular Cryptogams. III. Vascular Cryptogams. IV. Gymnospermous Phanerogams. V. Monocotyledonous angiospermous Phanerog·ams. VI. Dicotyledonous angiospermous Phanerogams. In the present state of botanical -science Brongniart's Agams would probably an be relegated to his second group, or Cellular Cryptogams, but in other respects this classification is pre-eminently sound, and seems likely to be vindicated by the future progress of the science as against some of the recent ·systems emanating from the highest authorities. To these few general groups Brongniart proceeded to refer the fossil forms either as new and avowedly extinct genera, or, wherever possible, as extinct species of living genera. This was carried entirely through the ss:stem in his "Prodrome,'' and, so far as it went, the "Histoire" afforded ample justification for his determinations in the form of full descriptions and thorough illustrations. This latter work was in a manner completed by his "Tableau" 243 in 1849. The method of Brongniart
has, with few exceptions, been adopted by subsequent paleobotanists, Une of these exceptions, however, is too important to be passed over. although it has already been considered in certain of its bearings. This is the system of Lindley and Hutton. These authors, apparently in order to emphasize their diRsent from the theory of development~ reversed the order, placing the most highly developed forms first. They also placed the Coniferre and Cycadere in the subclass Exogenre, or

243 T a bleau des genres de vegetaux fos iles considere sons le point de vue de leur

classification botanique et de leur distribution geologique. Paris, 1849. (Dictionnaire

universe! d'histoire na.turelle.

-

/

430 _ SKETCH. OF PALEOBOTANY.
Dicotyledons, without intimating that they differ in any essential respect from oaks or elms.
The following is their system in outline:
CLASS I.-VASCULARES, OR FLOWERING PLANTS.
Subclass 1. EXOGEN.lE, or DICOTYLEDONS.
N y m p l;ueacere. Laurinere. Leguminosre. Ulmacere. Oupuliferre. Betulinere. Salicinere. Myricere. .J uglandere. Euphorbiacere. Acerinere. Coniferre. Cycadere. Doubtful.
Subclass 2. ENDOGEN.lE; or M:oNOCOTYLEDONS.
Marantacere. Asphodelere. Smilacere. Palrnre. Fluviales. Doubtful.
Flowering plants which cannot be with certainty referred . to either the monocotyledonous or the di~.otyledonous classes.
CLAss II.-OELLULARES, OR FLOWERLESS PLANTS.
·Equisetacere. Filices. Lycopodiacere. Musci. Characere. Algre.
Plants the affinity of which is altogether uncertain. Stigm(trid is put in the Euphorbiacere, Sphenophyllurn in the Ooniferre, Annularia and A~terophyllites in the Dicot:yledons, llmggerathia in the Palmre, while Sigillaria and Volkmannia are classed with the last, or wholly uncertain ·group. With the rapid increase of material for the study of fossil plants the possibility of referring them to living fe:irnilies and genera bas increased

WARD.)

THE NATURAL METHOD.·

431

until at the present time nearly all the remains of the former Ye.getatiou of the globe are readily assigned to their proper place in the gen-
eral system adopted by botanists. Within a few years the number of dicotyledonous species bas become so large that the attempt to identify them has been eminently successful. By the aid of a set of rules deduced from the prolonged study of the nervation of leaves the genera
of fossil Dicotyledons have,been in great part made known. The onlj:
prominent question which this increased knowledge bas raised in the
department of classification has been with reference to the order in which the divisions of J ussieu should stand. .It is, howeYer, now generally admitted that the order in which these three divisions of plants appeared was that of Adrien de Jussieu and not that of A. L. de Jns'Sieu,244 the Gamopetalre constituting the most recent group of plants
developed upon the globe. M. Scllimper, while adhering to the old
method in this respect for his s;ystematic arrangement of the families, bas nevertheless clearly shown that this does .not represent tlJe order of nature, and in his review of these groups 245 he has arranged ·t·hem according to the natural method.
It is thus that after two centuries of floundering in turbid waters the
science of paleobotany has at last found itself in condition to take its
proper place as a department of botany-the botany of the ancient world-in which, whatever geology may gain from it, it must rest upon
geology as its solid foundation.

IX. THE NATURAL METHOD AS INDICATED BY PALEOBOTANY.

The aid that the study of fossil plants affords in arriving at a natural classification of living plants is of prime importance, because it supplies at first hand the chief object for which all classification legitimately exists, viz., a knowledge of how existing forms came into being and why they are what they are.
Much as we may rlelight in the discoverY, of new and beautiful forms, and may admire the objects in our possession as products of nature and pets of our specialties, we must, as investigators of nature, feel a higher interest in the great problems of their origin and detelopment, whose solution in strictly scientific ways constitutes the proper aim of science

itself.

[

The method by which these problems can be most successfully attacked

is the method of clctssi.fication. Notwithstanding the contempt into which

mere "systematists'' have la/tterly fallen, the true scientific method is

still and must ever be the SY/stematic method. The real cause for the

present disdain of systematists, lies in the mistaken spirit in which I

244Adrien de Jussieu. Cours elementairc d'histoire naturelle. Botanique. Paris,.

1840, p. 395.

.

1

·

245 Trail e de Pal. veg., Tome I, pp. 83-87

432

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

system-making has been so commonly conducted. Systems of classifi-

cation had come to be -regarded as the end of science, when they are at

best only the means. But it is not to be wondered at that this was so,

since it was not until quite recently that science could be fairly said to.

haYe any end other than to collect facts and build systems. Not until

the laws of genetic dependence among the forms of organized life, as

taught by Lamarck in 1809 and enforced by Darwin in 1859, had begun

to be recognized within .the last twenty sear_s, was any such grand re-

sult thought possible as that of ever finding. out how existing forms

·have come -to be what they are. With tQ.e growth of this conception

all attempts at classification ·gradually became revolutioniz.ed in their ·

spirit and aim, and from being merely logical and ideal they tc;mded to

become practical and real. Whereas formerly some collected facts .for

the sake of facts, and others built systems for the sake·of systems, now

all co11ect facts for the sake of systematizing them and systematize them

in order to learn what they teach; for .neither without facts nor with-

out system can we ever arrive at truth. .

It is customar~r with botanists to speak of artificial systems of classifi-

cation as contrasted with the natural sys.te1n. ,It is commonly. supposed

that the system ·of Linnoous .was wholly artifical, and ·.the impression

€qually prevails that that-of Jussieu was the true: natural one. But in

the progress of human discovery no -such sudden leap ever takes place.

The truth is that all systems have aimed. to be natural and .that none

ofhave whol1y succeeded. But there has been progress in the concep-
.tion what constitutes a natural system. The most. that the older bot-

anists aimed to ~ecure was a logical syst~rp, and it was supposed that

the logical necessarili repre.sen~ed th~ mitural.

·

1. · TYPES · OF VEGETATION.
The vegetation of the globe has alw~ys been divided into certain obvious groups which may be .called types, the word" type" being here used in a very general and indefinite way. These types of vegetat-ion have various systematic values. The followin-g table contains the prin·Cipal ones, with a brief.explanation accompa.nying.each:

.Synoptical View of the !!ypes. ·

CRYPTOGA.Ms.-Flowerless plants. ·

Cellular Gryptogarns.-Devoid of vessels or vascular bundles; e. g.,

sea-weeds, mosses.

Vascular Gryptogams.-Having vascular bundles-fibers. ducts, etc.

Filices.-Ferns~

Rhizoc£wpere.-Inconspicuous plants, of interest chiefly as ap-

pearing to form the transition from the Cryptogams to the

Phamogams through the Oycadaceoo; e. g., Marsilia, Sal-

. Yinia, Azolla.

,

WAIUI. )

TYPES OF YEGETATIO .

433

'RYPTOG l\I . -F lowerle s plant -Continued. Eq1tisetiucm.-Rush -like plants, with whorl ofleafl.es branches; e. g., 'alamite , scouring ru be . Lycopodinece. -Plants with scaly stems or trunk. ; e. g., Leri<lodenchoo, club-mos es. Ligulalm.-lucoo picuou plant , of intere t chiefly a appearing to form the trausitioo from the Cryptogam to the Phre-
nogams through tlte Con iferre; e. g., I oete .
PH1E ' OG.A.l\1 ·.-Flowering plants. Oy11W0spenns.-Plant having their ovaries open an<l tlte ovules :mel eeds n aked or exposed. Oycadacea:.-Trees mid way in general a pect between tree-ferns and palm ; e. g., ago palm. OoniJimc.-The pine family; e. g., pin e, fir, cedar, yew, etc. Gnetacecc.-A small family of leafless plant , intere ting- chiefly a appearing to form the tran ition fi·om t!Je Equi etinere
to the Dicotyledons, through the Casuarin re ; e. g., Ephedra
anti •yphilitica. .ANGIO ''PEl'nfS.-Pl ants having their o>ule ancl eeds protected y
clo eu ovari es. J[onocot,qledons. -Plaut that come np with a ingle blade, or ·ot, - "
led on; tem cndogeuon ; e. g., g.-a , lily p al m.
Dic.;otyledons.-Plaut · tbatcome up witb two I av · , or c tyl e~'wns;
tems exogeuou ·. Apetalce or Mono chla.mydece.-Pl an t ' ha· in cr bu t 0 11 tloral eu -
Yelope (a. calyx but no coroll a ) ; e. g. on k will w.
Polypeta.lce. -Plants hav in g two floral nYelopes ( caly . a ud a
· corolla), th corolht con i ·ting of separa t e p tal ; e. g., ro ,
maguoliH, maple. Gamopetalce or 'llonopeta.lce.-Plant having tw floral m-el·
ope , tile coroll a cons isting of a itwle pi , or 1)etal; e.
g., lloney uckle, catalpa, trumpet-flower.
The uarne contaiued iu this table at'e the mod rn one , and otller term with ,.perhap , about the ame meaning will be found in th e y terns of cia· ifi.cation of t he older botani t , while in om uc~t . .rstem quite different g-roups ar recog nized as 11rimary.

2. THE LINN.iEAN SYSTEM.

The history of t.be progres' mad by botani ts proper without the aid

of paleo~tology, in the direction of tb natural m ethod, did pace per-

mit, woulu well repay examination. I shall conftne myself to presentin g

tile three p1·incipal systems in a much-abridged forn1 a p rbap ' the

most satisfactory way in which t hat progres · can be indicated . The

system to which I refer are thos , re pectiv ely, of Linn re u , of A . L.

de Ju ien and of Adr ie.n de Jus ieu. The .first of the e, the sy tern of

Linu re u , is introduced merely to show t hat it is not altogether an arti-

GEOL 84--28

/

/

/

/

434 KETCH OF PALEOBOTA Y.

ficial one, but, lik e all th re t, an effort at real classification. More clt>ally to indicate thi s I ha\'C anauged it in logical form, au<l, for brevit,y' ' ake, have iutrodu ed a uumber of uon-Linmean term

The Uun rea u system .

Cryptogamia . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . .. . . .. ... . . ... . . . . . ... . . . ryptogamia .

( Dicliua.e ... ...... ..... . .. ... ... .. ............. .... ....... ) ~·i·~~~~~li a..

( Mon reoia.

Gy nandria ... .( .. ... .. ............. . . ..I.G~;~;~~ ~~~:~;t~.

'I [

Dc

maneI

. na.

····

····· ··

] o lyndclphi a.. DiadclphiH.

I l i\lon ad lph ia. A n i. an. 5Tctradynamia.

dria. ~ Oidyoa.mia.

Ph renogamia.

r I Ill«m•pbroditrol El uthcrogynia<
Eleuihoran- J d. ,

( rolya n<lri;t.

Icosand ria.

IIDodecaod ria .

Dccnndria:

EO·

nnrntlll~l'la. ctant na.

I na. llsandria ll ptamlria.
1 ll exnndria.. P ntandria. Tt:l rand ria.
I Triandria. I Dinntlria.
l l l l l Monundria.

All -who are familiar with th o Liuu man sy tem will, of course, ob·
c Ye that the onl er is !Jere inverted. Th e names of the ucc ·iyeJy

larg rgroup.-,witlltbe xceptionofthet rm s " ryptogamia"and''Ph re-

nogamia,' ar merely iu\ented to ob,·ia-te the ucce ity of de ribing

tho e gro11p . Tbi form of pre ntatiou !ea rly how to how largo an

extent Liunreu aimed at a logical la ification.

3. SY TEM OF TilE J lEU

We will next glance at tb

of the Ju

B rnar<.l de

Jus ien ha merely left u hi atal guo of the ga rd en of Triauon,

bnt tbi enigmatic li t of na me is r ga r<l d by mod m botani ' t · a

containing the gt>rm of all later y t m . uided by it, hi nep!Jew,

.Antoine Laurent de Ju ieu, proceeded to elaborate tbe c I brateu Ju ·

ireau y tern, of which a mere outliu i pre, en ted in the following table:

y tem of A. L. de Jussiet~.

.Acot,rledon . Monocotyledon .

petalro.

Dicotyledon s Monopeta m.

{

Poly petalre. Dicliu< .

This system, as will be ob er\ed, re t primaril y upon the munber of

cotyle<.lons, and in maldng the ryptogam · co-ordinat with the Nl.onocotyledon::; and the Dicotyletloo fails to draw tbe great dividing lin e which Linm u clearly perceived between the Cryptogamic aud the P!Jreuogamic series.

WARD.]

BOTANICAL SYSTEMS.

435

In re-elaborating it, his son, .Adrien, adhered to this defect, b t introduced some improvements. We will next glance at this latest form of the J ussiffian system:

System of Adri"en de Juss·ieu.

.Acotyledons. Monocotyledons.
1.. {Dicotyledons . . .

Gymnosperms Dwlmffi · · · · · · · · · · · Angiosperms.
1.Apetalffi.

I Hermaphroditffi... Polypetalffi.

( Monopetalffi,

In this case we see a very great ad vance in the recognitio of the Gymnosperms. In transposing the Polypetalffi and Monope alffi he also departed from the views of his father, and in this modern b tanists have not followed him, although, as remarked above (p. 4 1), this ·change would undoubtedly be in the direction of a true natural system.

4. SYSTEM OF MODERN ! BOTANISTS.

From the systems of the Jussieus to that which prevails am ng botanists of the present day the transition is slight. Linnffius's Cryptogamic and Phffinogamic series are restored; the terms '' Exoge s " and '' Endogens" are introduced as synonym9us with "Dicotyledo s" and ." Monocotyledons," of which they take prfecedence; the Gymn sperms
are recognized; and .A. L. de Jussieu's or~er is restored fort e Poly-
petalffi and Monopetalffi, for which latter name that of " G mopet-
alffi" is coming to be preferred, while fo~ '' .Apetalffi" the ter Mono-
ehlamydeffi is substituted by some. The system, then, is subs antially as follows:

Cryptogams.

I

J.\ Endogens, or Monocotyled~ns.
· · j · Gymno- ~ g~~r~~~~ffi.

!Phffinogams.l Exogens, or sperms. ( Gnetaceffi.

.

Dicotyledons.

.Angi0 _

·1

~petalffi, or Monochl
Monopetalffi, or Gam

mydeffi. petalffi.

· sperms. Polypetalffi.

.All modern text-books invert the order and begin with the Phffino-
gams, but whet.her advisable or not this i~ intended merely to cilitate
st.udy, the higher forms being easier of co~prehension, and do s not at all imply that our leading botauists belie~e this to have been t e order
orin which plants have developed. This inversion of the ord r, how-
ever, shows how completely the notion development is ig ored in
modern botany, and the system throughlout rests upon the vidence furnished by the organs of the plants as they are understoo . It is proper to say that at the present time quite a large body of t e most thorough students of vegetal embryolog~ and histology, esp cially in Germa-p.y, have rejected much of this system, and especially th t which
concerns the Gymnosperms. These they ~.r:ove in the most sat sfactory

436

EKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

.'
manner to constitute a lower type than any other of the Phamogams, and they conclude that they form a more or less natural transition from the Cryptogam§! to the Phamogams, between which they place them. This result is most gra.tifsing to the paleontologist, for nearly or quite every work on fossil plants gives the Gymnosperms this position at the base of the Phamogamic series, so sagaciously assigned to it by Brongniart. Paleobotanists have been compelled to do this in the face of the prevailing botanical systems, because this is the position which they are found to occupy in the ascending strata of the earth's crust. It is astonishing that botanists could have remained so indifferent to such a weighty fact, and it is certainly most instructive to find the geological

record, so long unheeded, confirmed at last by the facts revealed in living plants. There is no evidence that those who have thus confirmed it were in the least influenced by it, and Sachs is.as. silent as to paleontology as is Bentham or Gray.
The founders and perfectors of the prevailing system of botanical

classification have not been influenced in any marked degree by the idea of development jn vegetable life. Few of the earlier ones had ever
heard of development; and those who had beard of !t rejected it as a
visionary theory. This system had become established long before the doctrine of the fixity of ·species had received a shock, for although La-

marck, himself a botanist, had sown the seed of its ultimate overthrow, still it required half a century for this seed to germinate, and it was during this half century that the Jussirean system :was supplanting the

J..innrean and gaining a firm foothold. It is our special ta8k to examine this system by ~he light of the now
unhrersally accepted laws of develop.ment and to see in how far it con-

forms to those laws. We shall see that, with a few important exceptions and some unimportant ones, this purely logical classification is in .substantial h&rmony with what we now believe to be the order de-

manded by the law_of descent-ail encouraging faet as showing that natural truth may often be correctly discerned by purely rationaJ pro~esses. Had Jussieu been told that the ·Monocotyledons and Dicotyledons were the direct descendants of the Acotyledons he wouhl probably have treated the proposition with contempt. In his system the latter were p1aced before the former merely because they represented a lower

grade of organization, and it was the relative grades of organization that determined the position of the minor as well as of the major groups throughout the Jussirean system.

5~ MODIFIED BYBTEM PROPOSE[\
Now, therefore, that we have been compelled, from an entirely different class of evidence, to accept the ·fact of descent, we are glad to find that this does not wholly revolutionize the system arrived at from considerations of structure aione, while at the same time we must claim that this substantial agreement furnishes a, strong corroboration of the theory of descent.

WARD.]

BOTANICAL SYSTEMS.

43 7

The following table may be taken to rl present, so far as t e tabular form will permit, .the system of classificttion called for by th present known facts of structural botany and of paleontology. ·

Assumed natural system.

.. Cryptogams.

~ Cycadacere.

Gymnosperms. C?nifet·re. .

.

1Phrenogams.

Gnetacere. ~ Ml.onocotyledo~s.

IAngiosperms · ·

I
DicotyJedons.

~

APo.pleytpa

rtea.lre.

I ,( . . L

Garno etalre.

A glance at this table will show that ~he most important espect in

which it differs from the one last examined IS in the position and rank

of the Gymnosperms. Whereas there the Gymnosperms a d Angio-
sperms have only the rank of subclasse1 under the class E ogen~, or

Dicotyledons, they here assume the rankfof cla.sses, and theM nocotyle-

dons and Dicotyledons are reduced to s 1bclasses under the class An-

giosperms. The Gymnosperms are thus taken out of the Die tyledons

entirely. This is done because the distinution of open and clos d ovaries
is regarded as a class distinction, and t~e Monocotyledons ar as truly Angiosperms as are the Dicotyledons, sin~e they possess the clo ed ovary;

because the Gymnosperms are not dicotyledonous, the number of cotyle-

dons var_ying from one to fifteen; and bJcause, while all Gym osperms
are not strictly exogenous nor all 1\-fonoc~tyledons strictly endogenous,

the woody structure of the Coniferre di:ff~rs fundamentally from that of

all dicotyledonous plants. But a discussion of these points would carry

us too far.

I

It will also be perceived that the order proposed by A.drien de Jus-
sieu for the divisions of the Dicotyledon~ is here adopted, the reasons ·

for which have already been referred to and will receive more special

attention hereafter.

6. CLASSIFICATION OF T:HE CRYPTOGAMS.

Cry~togamsThus far we have considered the

as an undivided group

of plants; but they too are capable of subdivision. The classification

of the Cryptogams, however, is still in /its infantile stage and is the

problem which is at. this moment most~earnestly claiming the attention

of advanced botanists. The subject is too special to be entered into ·

here, and I shall confine myself to na ing a few of the groups which
modern investigation has shown to th~ow some light upon the more

general problem of descent in plant lifeJ

·

That the first proper plants were cepular Cryptogams there is no

question, and to that class still belong Ia great number and variety of

forms, the seaweeds, fresh-water algre, fupgi, lichens, liverworts, mosses,

etc. From these have in all probability descended the vascular Crypto-

· 438

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

gams, now chiefly represented by our ferns, club mosses, and scouring rushes. Leaving the cellular Cryptogams undivided, we will consider some of the groups of the vascular Cryptogams. The great preponder-

ance of these forms of vegetal life throughout Paleozoic time renders

this necessary, notwithstanding their insignificance at the present epoch.

As in the present, so throughout the past, the vascular Cryptogams are prominently divided into three great groups, which may be roughly

designated as the fern group, the Calamite group, anq the Lepidodendron

group. Ancient ferns differed from those with which we are acquainted

in being nearly aU arborescent, or tree-ferns. The great Calamites of

the coal-measures are now represented solely by our genus Equisetum,

or scouring rush, while the Lepidodendron had degenerated into our

little ground-pines and club-mosses (Lycopodium).

A careful study of the fossil remains of the Calamites and lepidodendroid growths of the Carboniferous period shows clearly that they

were then much more closely related to each other than are -the present

Equisetaceoo and Lycopodiace::e, and there can be little dottbt that

strictly intermediate forms existed. We may therefore class them

together under a larger general group, to which we will give the name

Lepidophytes. There is also a suggestive resemblance between some of the tree-ferns and certain of the Calamites, so that far back in that

hoary antiquity of vegetable life we find a certain homogeneity and

monotony, which show that those plant-forms as we now understand

them were to a large extent undifferentiated and blended together.

Two small orders of cryptogamic vegetation, too rare to be frequent

in a fossil state, and, indeed, unless formerly much more robust than

now, too frail to admit of preservation except under the most favorable circumstances, possess for the modern cryptogamic systematist an extra-

ordinary interest. These are the Rhizocarpe::e, or pepperworts, now

chiefly represented by Salvinia, lJlarsilia, and .Azolla, and the Lignlat::e, towhich belong only lsoetes, the quillworts, and Selaginella. The re2.son

for this special interest lies in the fact that the plants of these two

orders, alone of all Cryptogams, pos~ess characters which seem to mark the transition from the cryptogamic mode of reproduction to that of the

Gymnosperms. In this the Rbizocarpe::e are supposed to approach

more closely to the Cycadace::e, while the · Lignlat::e simulate rather the

Coniferoo. On account of this exceptional prominence of these two

orders I give them a separate I)lace in the following table of classifica-

tion of the Cryptogams:

Cellular Crypt.ogams.

JF 1.1w. m. e::e.

·

-·

·

·

{

Filices (Ferns). Rhizocarpe::e.

Vascular Cryptogams.

~ Equisetine::e.

. 1 Lepidophyt::e ... Lycopodine::e.

· ·. l ·

. Ligulat::e.

By uniting this table with the one -last examined a somewhat .com-

WARD.) ·

PLANT LIFE OF THE GLOBE.

439

plete view of the classification warranted by the present knowledge of plant life rna be gained.
7. GEOGNOS !CO-BOTANICAL VIEW OF THE PLANT LU.,~ OF THE
GLOBE.
We will no attempt to marshal in as convenient a form as possible the principal facts which paleontology and modern botany afford, with a view to examining their bearings upon the problem of classification in general and upon those of descent and development in particular. In doing this we are compelled to depend upon the weight of evidence furnished by the number of species alone, Since it is -impossible to take account of the relative predominance of species, however great and important the differences may be in this respect. The number of species really marks the degree of variety or multiplicity, which certainly forms a rude index to the degree of abundance or prominence. Where a number of types are compared this difference in their degree of variety may fairly be assumed to apply to all alike, and the conclusions thus drawn will be measurably accurate; and in general this multiplicity of varying forms under larger types may be taken in a manner to represent the relative exuberance or luxuriance of the type, and thus roughly to indicate its relative predominance as a form of vegetation.
In all attempts to argue from paleontology allowance must, of course, be made for the imperfection of the geological record, and in no department is this imperfection greater than in that of plants. Yet it is certainly remarkable how large a portion of the earth's surface has, at one epoch or another, presented the conditions which have proved favorable to the preservation of vegetable remains. Our surprise at this is heightened when we contemplate the present state of the globe upon which that condition seems scarcely to exist. We know that the great land areas of our continents are wholly incapable of preserving the leaves that annually fall upon them, and it is only in the quiet ·beds of rivers that have reached their base level, or in their deltas, or else in localities where tufa-laden spring water flows over vegetation, or lastly, in our great swamps, that such a result is possible. This last condition is believed to furnish the key to the solution of the problem of most of the ancient vegetable deposits, but the limits of this paper forbid me to enter into a discussion of this subject.
The following table presents in a rough manner the history of the introduction of plant life upon the globe as revealed by the remains that have actually been discovered. It has been compiled from about 25,000 species slips which have been the product of nearly two years' labor in cataloguing the literature of Paleobotany. Although this work is by no means completed, still, it embraces nearly all the more recent and more important works on the subject, and hence cannot fall far short of affordi~g a correct view of the present state of knowledge of the fossil flora of the globe.

440

SKET.CU OF PALEOBOTANY.

:Number of species of each of the principal f]!pes of t•egetation .that hat~e been. found fossil in · ·· sible to asw·tainj together with the percentage that

CRYPTOGAMS.

VASCUJ.AH.

Geological formations. Cellular.

Ferns.

Rhizocarpere.

Equise ti· nere.

Lycopo<li· n( ·re.

Ligulatere.

-----------: ----~---- ! ---~~---1-----~-- --------- ------- - -
INum-1 P er Num- Per Num· Per Nuru- Per Nnm.l Per Num· P er
b~r. . .cent. \ ber. cent. ber. cent. ber. cent. ber. cent. ber. cent.

- - ------·--------- - - - - ---~---- - -- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - -_- . - - -.-

Present time _.•. _...... _35, IJOO .23. 89 3, 000 2. 05 100 0. 07 . 30 0. 02 500 0. 34 · 400 o. 27

I r u u - -Quaternary ... __ ... --;-

1
- -4-

~

-----;,5 - - ~ ~~ ~

I.~ Amher. . . . -. . . . 37 55. 2

S~ p:, Pliocene............. . ~ M~ucene - ...... 168 5. 5

0

~ I GOllgoceRne . ...... <D rreen h·er ....

17 5

2.2 2.2

~ ~ l~uce1; e -· ·-···· · 71 10.3

1 Paleocene . . - .. - 3 2. 5

_. _. __ . . . . . .

3 '3.1

87 2. 9 6

17 2 2 8 3.5

1 2

22 3.2 7 5. 9

. . . . . . .•••.

_. ___ _.....

.•..........

0. 2 18 0. 6

2 0. 06

0. 1 3 0.4 ...... -···- .... . ..... . . 0.9 3 1.3 0.4 0. 4

1 0.2

·-- · - · · -··.... - -.....

II Laramie........ Senonian . .. . . .. Turonian...... Cenomanian _. . .

13 3. 9
23 6. 5 1 20.0 8 3. 3

6~

Dakota......... 1 Gault................ .

0. 5

I

Urgonian.... Neocomian . .

. .

. .

. .

.

.

... . 10

25.6

-d~

I Wealden . . . . . . .
J Coral. ..........

~ Oolite . . . . . . . . . .

IP Lia~ . . . . . . . . . . . .
"':> Rhetic . . . . . . . . .

7 5. 8
19 29. 2 39 9. 3 13 9. ·7
8 6. 3

I<1l ! Keuper . ........ .... .... .. .

H.S

Mnsl'hPikalk..

2 33.3

BunterSanustein .......... .

23 ' 6. 9 0. 3 l 1. 3 0. 3 0. 9.

o: o: o:7a 20.6

...... 1 o. 3 -···· · . .. . .. -·-· -- · ·····

1 38

20.0 15.5

.. ..i- ..

4. ....i- -.

4: :::::: ::::::I-- ..i. ..

4.

7 3. 3

10 27. 8
50 46.3 o. 9 2. 8 0. 9

12 30.8

4! 36.4 ······ ...·... ............!......

12 18.4

133 31.7

0. 3 14 3. 3 3 0. 7

44 32.8

4 3. 0

69 54.3

5 3. 9

15 36.6 . ..... · ·· --'
l 16.7

7. a I ....

7 31.9

) 4. 5

PPrmian ........... .... .

aS -~
0
-<;D
P-t

Caruonit'c>rnns

Rubcnrboniferou·s· :: .

D uYon Upper

iSainlnl'ia~-:~~:

~

Lowt·r SHUJ·ian ...

Cambrian .......... .

6 17

1.8 1.2

186 55.4 .. ........ .. . ..... 26 627 42.4 . .. .. ..... · · - -· - 143

7. 7 9. 7

9 361:!

2. 7 2i. 9

... ..

.... .....

I

-. -..-..-..-..·.

5 3. 7 64 47. 4

0. H 20 14.8 25 18.5 ... . .. ...... ....

33 17.6 79 42.0

1. 6 16 8. 5 28 14.9 ......... I ..........

:::::: ~.8 61.5
40 90.9 2 1100. 0

2 1
........ . .

15.4 2. 3 ..........

...... . .
·.-.-.".'!.·.·

.. . ... 1 1
....

7. 7 1 7. 7 .... . .. I ...........
2. 3 2 4. 5 ......... I .......... . ......... .......... . · ····· i ······ ~ ······

I
I

I.

WARD.)

PLAN~ :LU~B OF TIUJ Q;LOBB.

441

each geological fonnation, also the numbm· exist-ing at the p1·esent time as nearly as it is pos-

each type forms of the total.flm·a of each fm·mation.

··

PHlENOG.AMS.

GYMNOS PERMS .

ANGl{OSl'EllMS.

Cyc;1dacere. Coniferre. Gnetacere.
- --,----!- - _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _

Total.

Di~oty ledon~.

Monocoty. 1-------,------- - - , - -- - -

Iledons. I_· _ _ __

~etal a; .

1
Polypetalre. Gamopetalre. ___

Num- 1 Per ber. cent.
75 0. 05 2 '· 5

Num· her.
300 •

I Num- ~1Per Num- 1 Per Num- Per Num- 1 Per I

Per ., Num- P er Num-

cent.. ~ cent.~ cent. her.
I I0. 24 40 0. 03 20, 000 13. 65 12, 000
•• 9 .: • •• . . •••• •• . . • . • . . ••. • . . 27

·I 1cent. ~~ cent.. ~ cent.~
8. 19 35, 000 '23. E9 40, 000 27. 31 146,445-
33. 3 9. 9 I 7 s. 7 . 81

. . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
6 0. 2 2 0. 3 . ... . . .. .. ..
0. 4 · ···--··----
1 0. 3 5 1. 4
11 4. 5 7 3. 3 2 5. 5 21 19.4 6 1 15.4
43 I 35.5
17 26.2 ll6 27.7 58 43.3 26 20.5

14 20.9

1 1. 5

13 13. 3 .. . • .. . . .. .. .

250 8. 2

1 0. 04

64 8. 3

1 0. 1

10 4. 4 .. . .. .. .. .. ..

34 4. 9 .... .. . . ... ..

1 0.8 ............

2 3. 0 9 9. 2 272 8. 9 82 10. 6 21 9. 2 116 16.8
7 5.9

5 7. 5

1 1.!)

32 3:?. 0

31 31. 0

826 27. 1 1, 064 35. 0

256 3il. 1 259 33. 6

85 37. 1

73 31. 9

162 2:1.5 221 32. 1

57 47.9

39 32.8

7 10.4 10 10. 2 346 . 11. 3 70 9. 1 20 8. 7 59 8. 6
4.2

15 . 5 ........... ......... 33 9. 9 125 37.5 84. 25.2 30 9. 0

34 9. .6 ........... .... .. .... 18 5.1 118 33.3

6~ 18.1

18 5.1

1
28 12

20.0

1

11. 5·.

4o

............ ..... ........
.... .. .......

..........
...........
. .........

. .......... 6 5

-· -··· 2. 5 2. 4

... . ......
61 88

25.0 41.3

2 40.0 82 33.7 84 39.4

2. 9 4. 2

22 61.2 ....... ..... .............

2 5. 5

25 23.2 .......... ............

6 5. 6

0. 9 . ......... .......... ........ ....

9 23.1

2 5.1 ........... .. ............ .......... ~ - ...... . ........... . ........ .

26 21.5 17 26.2
1oa 24.6 10 7. 5 18 14.2

0. 8
0. 3 9 2.1 5 3. 7 1 0. 8

67 98 3, 04& 772 229 689119-
333 354
5 244 213 3& 108 39-
121 65 419134 127

...1..5.

36.6 ~ ........

13.6

17. 1 50.0 31.8

2. 4 4 18.2

41 6
22

14 4.1

9J 27.4

.....8..

0. 5
.......

307 20. R 20 14. 8

3 8

~: ~ ::::::: ::::::1::::::: :::::.::::::: :::::

336 1,478

. 135

....... ....... 29 15.4

188

....... ......... 1 7. 7

13

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: ::::::: ::::· ::::::.:::::: _::::::: ::::::,:::::::1::::::

44 2.

442 SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.
Before entering upon a general survey of the development of plant life as shown in this merely numerical exhibit., it will be necessary to refer the reader to three diagrams (plates LVI, LVII, LVIII), which have been prepare~ with a view to rendering the principal facts embraced in the table more readily intelligible, and then to discuss each of the diagrams separately, keeping the numerical data constantly in view. For the execution of these diagrams I am indebted to Ensign Everett Hayden, United States Navy, on duty at the National Museum in the Department of Fossil Plants, who has not only plotted and drawn them, but has aided me greatly in selecting from among the many possible modes o£ graphic illustration the ones which, as I believe, most successfully serve·this purpose.
In all the diagrams an effort is made, of course in an approximate and very rude manner, to indicate time-measures in terms of thickness of strata, this being, however imperfect, certainly the only standard attainable. In a lecture delivered at the National Museum on February 24, 1883, on Plant Life of the Globe, past and present, enlarged diagrams having a similar object to those introduced here were used for illustration. < The data then obtainable for their preparation were very defective, and the time-measures were taken from Dana's "Manual of Geology." Those who may remf:'mber them, from notes taken or otherwise, will observe that in this latter respect the accompanying diagrams differ widely from the ones presented on that occasion. Upon investigation jt appears that the views of geologists- generally have changed materially since the appearance of the last edition of that work, and recent observations have tended to show that the thickness formerly assigned to Mesozoic, and especially to Tertiary, stra.ta was much too small in proportion to that assigned to Paleozoic, and especially to Silurian strata. After consultation upon this subject with the Hon . J. W. Powell, Director of the Sur·vey, it was decided that nearly equal vertical space might be given to each of the following formations, or groups: 1, Cambrian; 2,. Silurian; .3, Devonian; 4, Permo-Carboniferous; 5, Jura-Trias; 6, Cretaceous; 7, Eocene; 8, Mio-Pliocene. These have accordingly been taken as furnishing the scale of time equivalents, . and all the diagrams have been drawn to this scale.
The development of vegetable life through geologic time may be discussed from three somewhat distinct points of view. We may, in the first place, consider each of the principal types of vegetation at each of the geologic periods in which it occurs solely with reference to its relati\"e importance in the combined flora of that epoch. 1~his is undoubtedly the most important point of view from which tlle su~ject can be contemplated, and has accordingly been considered first. It is cl{'ar that the data for this must consist, not in the actual number of species at each horizon, but in the proportion, or percentage, which · this 1mmber forms of the total number found at such horizon. Diagram No. I is, therefore, based upon these percentages as given in the foregoing table.

\. I•:O L dG I CAJ . F O H~I AT I !h\" S I 'H t·:SF.t'\'1' T l :VI b

<'E I . I. l'I.AH

(' 11 Y P T 0 ( ; 1\ I ~
\ " A~(" l' l , t\ H

i"tftC ' (•~
[

r
ll'l ioc:~
I.Miocen~

I' II ,\ J·: :-\ ( ) C ,\ :--1 ~

C: Y M :-i 0 s F' t·: n :VI s

A;-..: U I (l S

:\1 0~0('0'1"Yl . l·: 1)0 :-; S

Con 1fen.H' and

Cnct:-tt'•'"n<'

_j

1-' 1·:

H :\1,..:

U I C () 'I' Y I , 1·: J) () ~ S
tiamopC;~ t alaf.'\

SP r"'()tll<:\11
Tur·onian CH ETACF.Ol'S l'('rtOir'\Qltt•·•n
(;~)till
l'r-gontan

_____......_____

-___1,._'"_"
_ __ tlhetir
1
l{('.np ~-
T II I ASSIC" M> li<<"l•ell<alk

1~-=-~--_j

Pe r uttan

('ARRONI F.
Sub car·bonif
v'
0
N
0 DE VON I AN

---------,--------------+-~------~ l l ip p t'J"
c; lf , l l H I AN l .ow e t·

- --- -.-------'-1-.

<. 1\ :>.I ll H I t\ '

=-c - - -
(~r

.hdH.IA i lltHI & Co.f,ith

WARD.]

DISCUSSION OF DIAGRAMS.

443

In the second place, we can consider each type of vegetation by and in itself, with a view to determining the geological age in which it first made its appearance, the general nature of its progress through time, and the period of its maximum actuafde,Telopment as an element of the vegetation. Such a presentation, however, wheu based ou the number of species actually found at each horizon, exhibits very great fluctuatious, due to the irregularities in the record. These irregularities de-
pend chiefly upon conditions quite independent of the real presence or
ab~ndance of the plants in any formation. These condit.ions are many,
but the principal ones may be embraced under three heads: 1. The
plan!~ must have existed at the period in question. This js the legitimate assumption and alone gives value to the diagram. . 2. The conditions for their preservation and then for their subsequent exposure must have occurred. Any one can see how exceedingly irregular must be these delicate conditions at different ages of the world. 3. The localities in which they are embedded must have been discovered and worked by the paleontologiRt. This is the great contingency which stands in the way of our acquaintance with any flora, but although doubtless more potent than the one last named, it possesses the merit of possible removal through the industry of man. · With all these detractions from its value this form of illustrating the geological record is nevertheless presented in Diagram No. II.
In the third place, we may, by a legitimate exercise of the rational method of science, construct a scheme of illustration, based indeed upon these facts as indispensable landmarks, yet recognizing the law of uniformity in natural processes that constitutes the primary postulate of science itself, which shall, to a large extent, eliminate the error of the defective record and present a rational and highly probable view of the true development. By a second act of ratiocination the probable period of first appearance of eaclJ type of vegetation may be deduced from the fact as to the earliest point at which it bas ·actually been discovered, and thus an approach far nearer, at least, to the true history of plants than is possible by the last-named method may be made. Diagram No. III presents the subject from this third point of view.
D-iscussion of Diagram No. I.-In this diagram the Cryptogams are represented in buff tints and the Pbanerogams in purple, with deeper s_hal1es for the successively higher types of each series. The diagram is based upon the assumption of the proportionate represent::ttion of types in the known floras of each age. Collectors of fossil plants never select. They take everything they find and make no attempt to find particular forms. If, therefore, the chances of preservation of different kinds of plants were equal the chances of finding any particular kind would depend upon its actual degree of abun<Jance in the given.flora. Conversely, the degree to which any type of r>lants is represented in the collections made would be a fair measure of such abundance or of the relative prominence-of the type in the flora of the given epoch. How-

44:4

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTAN~

ever imperfectly such a flora was represented in the collections, this relation would theoretically hold, and thus the imperfection of the geological record would be eliminated so long as . it was only contemplated from this relative stand-point. And although it is not true that all kinds of plants stand an' equal chance of preservation, still the classi- · fication of plants according to their adaptability to preservation is wholly different from their systematic botanical classification and travm:ses the latter in such a manner as rarely to coincide with its ·boundary lines or to exclude any entire group from the possibility of being represented in the fossil state. Nevertheless, such omissions, or at. least very disproportionate representations, will occur and must be allowed for. The theory also fails where a flora is only verymeagerly represented, and the smaller the representation the less applicable the principle. This accounts for certl}ill great irregularities in the diagram, which are greatest in the least adequately represented formations. Such defects will be readily rectified by the intelligent student of the diagram, and it was thought better to leave this to his judgment than to attempt to overcome the defects by an arbitrary reduction of irregularities. The numeri{!al table will aid in making the proper allowance in each case by indicating, as the diagram cannot do, the poorly-represented horizons. Upon the whole this diagram may be regarded as trustworthy in intelligent hands and as fairly indicating all that is claimed for it.
That vegetable life should have preceded animal life is a fair de_duction from all that we know of these two kingdoms of nature, and, not to speak of the much-disputed Eozoon Oanadense of Canadian so-calh~d Azoic rock1 we at least pave Oldhamia in the Cambrian, whose organic character is quite generally admitted. This and other facts give weight · to the view that the dark carbonaceous substance.fonnd in the Laurentian has been the result of accumulated vegetable matter of marine origin, but too frail in structure to admit of presen::ation in any other form. Graphite, too, -which is a pure form of carbon, and thus almost demonstrates vegetable origin, is found below the Silurian. But, dismissing these speculations and admitting the somewh·at doubtful vegetable character of Oldhamia, we actually have organized plants, marine algoo, preserved in the Lower Silurian and even at its base. Such are BUobites rugqsa, Chondrites antiquus, and Sphaerococcites Scharyanus. The CeUular Cryptogams are thus fairly introduced at points lower than that of the appearance of any higher type of vegetation, and by the close of the Silurian fifty species had ~aq~ their appearance, constituting 85 per cent of all the life of that epoch as thus far found. Not only in tllis case, but all through the series, the order in which these great types of vegetation are here drawn up agrees substantially with that of their appearance on the globe, ·as shown by ·actual ~pecimens collected and determined. _If the system of classification had been based exclu.s~vcly upon paleontological data, there would be no force in this, hut, as I have shown, i~_'is iJ?. large mea~ure that of botanists proper who never

~-

WAIW.j

DISCUSSION OF DIAGRAMS.

argue from paleontol~gy, and most of the points in _ ~hich it differs from

accepted botanical systems have been independently confirmed by

structural botanists.

More remarkable still, perhaps, than the .early appearance of marine

algoo is that of certain well-organized vascular plants that must have

inhabited the land. Among the earliest forms of terrestrial vegetation

we find the ferns, those graceful forms whose green, airy fronds are still

the delight of every judge of natural beauty. We have at least one

well-authenticated species in the Silurian-Eoptet·is Morierii of Saporta-

found by Moriere a few years ago at the base of the Middle 8ilnrian, a

gilt figure of which its namer has made the frontispiece of one of his

last works.246 The fern may be almost taken to represent the primary

form of the vegetative process. Its delicate spray resembles, most of

all plant-forms, the exquisite frost-work which we see on our windows on

a cold morning. -The physicists tell us that these latter are the result

of molecular activities and consist in the deposit of solidified molecules

of invisible vapor. Plant~ growth consists in the deposit of solidified

carbon molecules upon the growing surfaces of plants. Perhaps, then,

we should not wonder at the resemblance between the earliest forms of

plant life and those other forms which nature creates by the action of

-the same principle, and which the chemist can imitate in certain modes

of precipitation.

·

In the Devonian we have 79 species of ferns, and this type of vegeta-

tion reaches Us maximum in the Carboniferous epoch, which, if we ex-

tend it to include the Subcarboniferous and the Permian, furnishes 877

species, forming near-ly 45 per cent of the total flora . of that epoch.

aThere are good reasons for supposing that during this age the ferns
were nearly all arborescent and really formed large part of the Car-

boniferous forests. From this time forward they declined both in num-

ber and vigor until, at the present time, they are only 2 per cent of

the vegetation of the globe, aml in nearly all cases consist of ·low

herbaceous plants, almost valueless' except for their singular beauty.

Let us next consider the type which is here denominated the Equiseti-

nere. At the present time the natural order Equisetacem embraces all

the plants of this group, and they are very few indeed and insignificant

in size, but in the Carboniferous age they formed nearlylO per cent of the

vegetation, and furnished the great Calamites, which clearly show that

they were no mean ~lement in the forest growth of that period. Certain

plants of this group-Sphenophyllum primmvum, Annularia Rominger·i-

were found by Mr~ Lesquereux in the Cincinnati group of the Silurian,

an horizon, perhaps, lower than that of Eopter-is, and we must therefore

regard this type as of -exceedingly ancient origin. The Calamites dis-

appear entirely in -Mesozoic time and the type dwindles into insigri!fi-

cance.

246 Le Monde des Plantes avant !'apparition de 1'homme. Paris, 1879. (See pp; 35,166.)

44l) SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.
The ]jycopodinem, now represented by the natural order Lycopodiacem, and constituting little more than one-third of 1 per cent of the living "'Vegetation of the globe, embraced in the Carboniferous epoch the lepidodendroid group. About four hundred species of these plants.have been described from the Subcarboniferous to the Permian, and during their reign they formed nearly one~fourth of the vegetation of the globe. They were the largest forest trees of their time, and sometimes attained a great size, though, of course, nothing approaching the giants of our present forests. This ancient, or archaic, type disappears entirely with the Permian, and never reappears. Its degenerate descendants continue down to the present, chiefly in the form of club moss{'s, of which considerable variety existR.
The two remaining groups of cryptogamic plants, the Rhizocarpem and the Ligulatm, possess little paleontological importance, although tl1e number ofspecies, including spore-cases, that have been referred to the former of these orders bas now reached seventeen, four of which are Paleozoic (Devoni an and Subcarboniferous) and four Mesozoic. These, as well as most of the Miocene species, belong to the ge1~ us Sa.lvinia or one nearly allied to it (Protosa,lvinia Dawson), although one Pilularia bas been found at <Eningen, and a true Marsilia occurs in an undescribed collection now in my hands, made by Captain Bendire ·in the Miocene of the .John Day River region, Oregon, and which I propose to call Ma.t' siUa Bendirei, should there prove to be no inaccuracy in this determination,
As regards the Ligulatm, they are still less frequent in the fossil state, and are thus far represented only by the two very dissimilar genera, Selaginella and Isoetes. Unless, as has been affirmed, the former of these gent.>ra has its representatives in the Carboniferous, the group is not found lower than the Cenomanian of Atane, Greenland, where Beer has detected his Selaginella. arctica. Mr. Lesquereux bas described three speci s of this genus in the Laramie ·group, and the same author has found a true Isoetes iw our Green River Eocene, at Florissant, Colorado. Two more speciesofisoetes from the Miocene of Europe exhaust the enumeration, making in all only s~ven species of Ligulatre. · We have thus rapidly ·glanced.at the relative development of each of the cryptogamous ty.pes of vegetation, and will next consider that of the pbanerogamous types. As already shown, the Gymnosperms stand lowest, and have probably, in some still undiscovered way, descended from the Cryptogams. Of these we place the Cycadacere lowest on aceouut of their endogenous growth, circinate estivation, and other characteristics which seem to ally them to the ferns. Still, as the lines are now drawn by the best authorities, the Cycadacere cannot be traced below tlte Carboniferous, while the archaic progenitors of the Coniferre extend far down into the Silurian. If we refer the Medullosm to the
ferns, as .H.enault· and Grand' Eui·y would have us do, only three cyca-
daceous plants occur in the Carboniferous; but one of these is· a true

WARD.]

DISCUSSION 0.1!., DI.AGR.AMS.

447

Pterophyllum from the coal measures of China, and there is probably a second from Europe. Fourteen species occur in the Permian, including the typical genera DioonUes and Cla.thraria. It is not, however, until the Keuper is reached that this t_ype of vegetation assumes a leading part, and throughout the Jurassic it continues to be the most abundant form of plant life. In the Lias it forms 43 per cent of the flora of that formation, though this may be accidentally exaggerated. It was 28 per cent of the Oolitic flora and more than 35 per cent of that of the Wealden. From this point, however, its decline \Vas rapid and uninterrupted until in the living flora only 75 species of cycadaceous plants are known to botanists. Of these North America can claim but a single one, the sago-palm (Zamia angustij'olia) of our extreme Southeastern States.
Passing to the Coniferre, we find the Cordaites Robbii of Dawson
from the Devonian of Canada recurring in the Upper Silurian of He-
Fault._ This genus was formerly supposed to be the prototype of the Cycadacere, but, as already remarked, this opinion is now abandoned-by the best authorities, and the genus referred to the Coniferre. The evidence upon which this change rests cannot be presented here, but it is proper to say that the savants who have marshaled it have done so in such a manner as to render their conclusion akin to irresistible. But its adoption has carried with it a train of consequences which cannot be escaped. Not Cordaites alone, or with its spore-bearing parts (rordaianthus) and its fruit (Cordaicarpus), but Nmggerathia,, :I'rigonocarpu.fl, Cardiocarpus, Rha.bdocarpus, Sternbergia, Artisia, etc., must all follow in its wake and be gathered, one and all, into the great family of the Coniferre. It is thus, as shown by our table and diagram, that this type assumes such a commanding position far back in Paleozoic time, forming about om3-fourth of the vegetation of the Permo-carboniferous epoch. Doubtless this effect is exaggerated by duplications caused uy giving different names to separate parts of the same plant, but this occurs t.bremgbout-the series only to a less obvious degree.
The true Coniferre, which have some representatives in the Paleozoic, replace the Cordaitem entirely in the lower Trias and thereafter vie with the Cycadacere for -supremacy, which they do not fairly attain
until the lower Cretaceous is reached. Being of a higher type of struct-
ure than the latter by reason of their exogenous mode of growth and
other peculiarities, they refuse to succunib in competition with the now
rising Angiosperms and continue to bold their own through much of the Tertiary. At the present time the number of known species (300) would denote a great decline, but this is in large part made up by the wonderful predominance and territorial expansion of these persistent forms. Although from the point of view of the number of species alone, the present Coniferre would form but one-fourth of 1 per cent
of the vegetation of the globe, we in fact find vast tracts ~f country
covered with .pine, fir, and spruce forests, excluding almost completely

448

skETCH OF PALEOBOTAN.Y.

all other types. ·But that the pine·family is now waning there can be no doubt. Important f01~ms have wholly disappeared, a~d others that once were abuudant have no'w nearly- vanished from the earth. Of this last truth an example of unusual interest is furnished by the genus Sequoia. Of 'the score or more of t:pecies that made up so large a part of American Tertiary forests our well-known "big tree'~ of the Sierras . (S. gigantea) and our California red-wood (S. sempervirens) now stand alone and continue the combat against fate-the closing struggle of a dying race. · Of the Gnetacere I need not here speak, as its paleontological record is almost nil, and its itpportance depends upon circumstances wholly ·disconnected from its prevalence as a type of vegetation.
We come now to the Angiosperms. A great step forward had been taken, and in her solicitude for her offspring · Nature had, as it were, built a house over the hitherto unprotected germs of plant life. The closed ovary marks an era in the march of vegetal development.
The earliest form in which the Angiosperms appeared was that of the Monocotyledon. Issuing from the seed and from the g_round as a single spear or bla<le, the plants of this type grow up chiefly by an internal circulation which can only deposit nutrition at the apex (endogenous growth). As the lowest type of Angiosperms we find them~ according to our scheme of classification, occupying also the earliest position in the stratified deposits of the earth's crust.
• The existence of Monocotyledons in the Carboniferous and .Permian
was long disputed, although Corda, after the most exhaustive study of their structure, was obliged to refer two species of endogenous wood to that subclass. This determination has been thus far sustained, and to these have been added Palreospatlle Sternbergii, Unger, in the Carboniferous1 an<l two other species in the Permian. The very problem~tical Spirangium has generally been regarded as the fruit· of some Xyris -like Monocotyledon, and this view has been quite recent:y defended by Nathorst. Its occurrence in the Carboniferous is now also abundantly established by its discovery at Wettin, at Saint Etienne, and a~ Pittston, Pennsylvania. Certain lily-like forms, called Yuccites, are found in the lower Trias, and through the remaining Mesozoic these forms increase slowly and are reinforced by screw-pines and a few sedge-like plants. The monocotyle4onous Yegetation, 4owever, does not receive any ~arked character until tlw advent of the great palm family, which dates from the Middle Cretaceous. From this time, notwithstanding the rivalry of the now domiuant Dicot.yledons, this 'type progressed, reaching its relative maximum in the Eocene. Overslaughed by the higher growths, it thenceforward <leclined, but still numbers some 20,000 species and forms over one-eighth of the·total flora of the present epoch.
The step from the l\Ionocotyledon to the Dicotyledon is very great, and it seems to have required a vast period of time to accomplish it.

WARD.)

DISCUSSION OP DIAGRAMS.

44!)

Not only must a new form of growth from the seed and from·the ground be developed, and a sort of bilateral symmetry be introduced, but in addition to this, and, as I believe, in great part due to it, the exogenous mode of circulation and tissue growth must supplant the endogenous one, whereby the stem may increase in thickneRs as well as in length. These great mechanical problems were worked out during Mesozoic time and in ~he Middle Cretaceous, represented in this country by the Dakota group, and in Europe by the Cenomanian epoch, the great type of plant life appeared which was destined to dominate the world and sink all other forms into insignificance. But the most astonishing fact is tllat this young giant was born, as it were, full grown. In this lowest horizon at which any Dicot;yledons appear 247 we have already obtained more than three hundred spedes belonging to all three of the great divisions of the subclass, and exhibiting ample, luxuria!lt foliage. They embrace many of our most familiar forms, the poplar, the birch, the beech, the sycamore, and the oak. Here appears the fig tree, the true
laurel, the sassafras, the persimmon, the maple, the walnut, the magnolia, and even the apple and the plum. We must conclude, then, that the Dicotyledons had a much earlier origin than is sho~n by our defective record, and that they had been long developing through the Mesozoic ages.
If now we follow the advancing wave of plant life from this point upward we shall see that from the new vautage-ground furnished by the closed ovary, the perfect flower, and the exogenous trunk, its march was rapid and steady until-we reach the Miocene Tertiary, the culminating point in the paleontological series~ Here the species ·actually found are numbered by thousands, and the higher types greatly predominate over the lower ones. But from this point the record begins to fail, and can no longer be trusted. Very little is found in the Plio-
cene, and still less in the Quaternary; but this cannot indicate an actual decline in these types of vegetation. It must be due to the approach of a state of things which rendered the preservation of vegetable
isremains difficult, a condition, as already remarked, which especially
characteristic of the present state of the globe. The march of the Dicotyledons was uninterrupted, and still continues. The figures given in the numerical table represent, in round number3, the <stimates of Messrs. Bentham and Hooker, as given in their "Genera Plantarum," and may, therefore, be taken as the most reliable that can be obtained. The three divisions of the Dicotyledons combined amount to 87,000 species, and constitute nearly 60 per cent. of the flora of the globe.
With regard to the three divisions of the Dicot~rledons, although they are all represented in the lowest formation at which any considerable number are found, still the ApPtah:e constitute a larger proportion of the Dicotyledons in the Cenomanian (45 per cent) than in the Miocene (37

247 If we accept the solitary Populus primawa, Heer, from the Urgonian beds of Kome, Greenland.
GEOL 84-29

.

450

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTAN~

per cent), and very much larger in the Tertiary than in the living flora (14 per cent); while the Gamopetalre, which constitute only 5 per cent in the Cretaceous, reach 15 per cent in the Miocene, and 46 per cent in the living flora, here exceeding the Polypetalrn. From these facts it'is evident that the order of development is such as I have here given it, and that the type of the future is to be not the Polypetalrn but the Gamopetalrn. These conclusions are independently corroborated by a large mass of evidence of other kinds, but space forbids me to adduce it in detail. I may simply say, however, that just as the closed ovary of the Angiosperm in general furnished a condition for the development of that class at the expense of the unprotected Gymnosperm, so the two floral envelopes of the Polypetalrn and Gamopetalrn enabled those divisions to outstrip the Apetalrn with its single floral envelope; and since this advantage is proportional to the degree of protection secured, the Gamopetalrn, with their tubular corollas are manifestly better adapted to survi\e in this respect than the Polypetalrn. This is the chief argument, and, putting it with that from paleontology, it seems suf11cient1y . conclusive without detailed support.
Discussion of Diag'ram No. II.-In this diagram the time equivalents are the same as in the last, but only the more important types are represented. The Rhizocarpern, Ligulatrn, and Gnetacern are omitted, an~ the Dicotyledons as a whole are shown, disregarding their subdivision into Apetalrn, Polypetalffi, and Gamopetalm. ...<\.figure is ~dded representing the total of all the formations, and this is probably the most important of them all, as least affected by the gaps and fluctuations in the record. No account could, of course, be taken of the living flora, as is done in Diagram No. I, for while between the fossil and the living floras there is a similarity in the proportion that the types in each bear to the sums of such floras, no such analogy holds between the number of species actuallyknowninanyfossil flora and the number in the living flora. This, at least, is true of the total floras and of all the types except, perhaps, the Cycadacern and the Coniferrn. But even here the comparison would fail to express the rapid decline which thes~ forms have evidently undergone, at least so.far as the number of their species, which represents their diversity, is concerned.
While the diagram is of little service as a means of representing the true development of each type of vegetation or. of the general flora of past ages, it has considerable value as an exponent of the true character of the phyto-geologic record. It show~ more clearly and more strikingly than any words or :figures could do the great differences that characterize the different periods of geologic time in their su-sceptibility to deposit, preserve, and afterwards expose to scientific investigation the vegetable forms that constituted the floras of those periods. While this is well shown for the several dominant types it is especially obvious in the figure illustrating the entire flora. Here are brought prominently into view, first, the age of island vegetation in the Carbon-

U . S. GEO I.Of1 1C AT. SL'H Y R \"

G eologic:•1 ftu-m ntio ns.
I Qua tcnnu ·.r.
J\1i O· Plio em·-

Cellul ar.

E occ·n c.

Crc tnc ous.

F cn1 s .

Cr_y ptognms . V nsc ulnr.
Equ i se tio on.~ -

Gsmnospurn1 s.

Phrouo,qa mR.

An g: io penns .

Siluriau. Culllbrinn.

'
D IAGB"~• Ko. 2.
II O WIN G TIJio: Oll 1-:HVED OH I G I N AND I EVELOPMEI\T OF TilE f'H I NC I PAL TY I' E .· OF VE G F.TATJON 11\" GI!: OLOG IC T lMJ£.

4 11 ''e~o ta t io u .

•

WARD.j

DISCUSSION OF DIAGRAMS.

451

iferous; next, the second and still greater age of extensive marsh, vast low plains cut by shallow estuaries or partially or wholly cut off from the sea and forming brackish or fresh water deposits, which culminated in the Miocene; then, the two intermediate periods of only less favorable conditions occurring in the Brown tTura and the Cenomanian, respectively; and, .:finally, the long intermediate ages of less favorable or wholly unfavorable conditions and the abrupt termination of the entire period of plant deposition which accompanied the age of mountain building towards the .close of the Tertiary. The almost complete absence of vegetable remains in the Trias, the lower Cretaceous, and the Turonian of both continents points to the probable general subsidence of land areas at those ep6chs, at least for such portions of the earth's surface as have been explored by paleontologists. - But the great relative abundance of such life in the middle and again in the extreme upper Cretaceous shows that those must have been great land areas at all times-areas which are now either under the sea or belong to some of the still scientifically " unexplored regions" of the globe. The proof of this is made conclusive by the fact that new and higher type~ come forth abruptly in these floras which must have required ages of most
favorable conditions for their prior development.
Discussion of Diagram No. III.-This diagram is simply the application of the rational scientific method to the incomplete facts afford~d by the
present infantile Rtate of the science offossil plants. It does not pretend ·
to give the exact history of plant development, but only to constitute
a certain advance in this direction beyond what the fragmentary data. out of which it is constructed can alone furnish. For example, it is certain that the earliest record discovered by IQ.an of the exist~nce of any type of vegetation cannot mark the absolute origin of that type, audit is therefore necessary in every case to project the type downward to an unknown di~tance. ·If the real facts could be indicated we should see during these unrecorded periods the actual transformations. which must also be assumed to have taken place in each case before the fully-developed type could appear. This we are unable to repre-
sent, and must merely ]ndicate the early history of each type by its
downward projection to an assumed point of origin. Neither can it be
supposed that the great fluctuations shown in the diagram last con-
sidered are due altogether or chiefly to :fluctuations in the degree of vigor, territorial expansion, or local prominence of the given form of
, vegetable life. They are the results of varying geological conditions or of human good fortune, while the modifications in tbe forms themselves take place slowly and at uniform rates either in the ascending or the descending scale. · Recognizing this law of uniformity, no fluctuations in any homogeneous type have been admitted, but simply a more or less regular development in each from its assumed point of origin to its supposed period of maximum predominance, followed by an equally uniform decline to the present epoch when its condition relative to past

452

SKETCH OF PALEOBOTANY.

epochs is aJso indicated. The only exception to this rule has been made in the case of the Cellular Cryptogarris, whose heterogeneous character has doubtless caused it to undergo considerable fluctuation. One such is assumed in .the Carboniferous, in which, though one of the great periods of vegetable deposition, the actual number of Cellular Cryptogams falls below that of either preceding or subsequent periods. This seems .to argue that there was a reduced representation of this form of plant life in that age, and this is shown in the figure presented for that type.
The three fac~s which this dia.gram aims chiefly to bring out, not shown in either of the preceding diagrams, are, first, the true origin, or geological age of first appearance of each type of vegetation; second, the period of its maximum development; and, third, the rank it occupies in the living flora relative to its maximum. These are all delicate points to :fix in a manner that will satisfy aU the conditions of the problem. The evidence from all sides bas to be cautiouRly weighed, care taken not to give undue weight to any nor to undervalue any. These are not questions that can be hastily settled. T.bey require to be pondered long and well. It is by no means claimed that substantial truth has been reached in every case. . No two persons, however competent, woulcl probably exactly agree upon all the points, and I am sure that at different times with increasing evidence I have modified my own conclusions.
But this is far from confessing that the attempt is valueless, and it is
certain that great value should be attached to the enlarged conceptions {)f vegetal development that flow from such a study.
Descent ofplants.-But we need not stop here. The great law of development does not allow us to contemplate ~llese types as independent of one another. Each class of plants must be regard_ed as the descendants of some ancestral form more or less differentfrom it. The multiple origin of existing forms, whether of plants or animals, is repugnant to modern scientific thought. It i~ the discovery of facts that has rendered it so. The multiple and varied ·ofthe present must be regarded as due to divergences in the past. The forms we have have come down to us along divergent lines from common ancestral forms. These are the Unes of descent, and plants have their lines of descent as well as animals ·Or human families. Of this we are practically certain, but just what those .lines are and where they diverged-these are the great problems · {)f phytogeny.
The lines of descent in the animal kingdom have been laid down by various eminent zoologists with considerable confidence and unanimity. In plant life they have scarcely ever been attempted. The problem is loaded ·with extraordinary complic~tions and cannot be satisfactorily attacked until we shall possess far more knowledge than we possess at present.

U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Geologic:ll formations.

Cellular.

- 1 -- -Quaternary. I

-~0
~

I I>. :31-o

O l 1a

H

MioPliocene.

Eocene.

Cryptogams. Vascular.
Ferns.

Phamogams.

FIFTH ANNUAl;. REPOltT PL. LVIII

Gymnosperm!~.

.Angiosperms.

.A.ll vegetation. !

Cycad a cere.

C :retaceous.
J ' u r a-Trias. Permo-Carboniferous. D evonian.
Silurian.
Cambrian. DIAGHAM: No. 3.
SHOWIXG Tim ASSU:c\IED Oll1Gl~ AND .DEVELOP):IENT 01<' THE P RINCIPAL T\"PES OF VEGETATIO~ IN GEOLOGIC TI.ME.

·INDEX.

Page. Accompanying papers with report of Di-
rector ........ .. ......... .. . . ............ . 67-452 Adams.County, Wisconsin ... . .... . ....... 223, 235 Adiantum, Supposed fossil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402 A dministrative reports . . . . . . ...... . . .. ... . 3-66
; Becker, G. S ...... 47-49 ; Chamberlin,T. C.. 20-24 ; Clarke, F. W ..... 59--62 ; Dutton, Capt. C.
E...... . . .. .. .. . 42~43 ; Emmons, S. F _.... 43-47 ; Gannett, Henry . . 3~14 ; Gilbert, G. K . . . . . 30-34 ; Hagne, Arnold ... 15-19 ; Hayden, Dr. F. V. 28-30 ; Irving, Prof. Rol-
and D .. .. .. .. . .. . 24-28 ; Marsh, Prof. 0. C. 49-50 ; McGee, W J . ..... 3~41 ; Shutt, George W . 6~66 ; Walcott, Charles
D ......... , .. .. . 52-55 ; Ward, Lester F.. . 55-59 ; White, Dr. C. A .. 50-51 ; Williams, Albert,
jr................. 63-64 Advantages for artesian wells of low incli-
nation of strata ...•.. .......... .......... 146 Agams .......................... , •. ~· -····· . 429 Agamok, Lake .. . .. . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . .. .. .. . .. 207 Agassiz, Prof. A .. .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. . .. 54
L., an authority on glaciers.. 309 ; botany ............ . ...... ' 376
Agricola on petrified wood ................ 388, 391 Ahern,J ................ . .................. 47 Airy, G.B. , cited.................. . ........ 80 Alaska glaciers ........................... 348-355 Albertus Magnus the fir&t to mention pet-
rified wood.. .. .. .. .. .. 388 on the virtus formativa ..... 389, 390 Aleutian Islands glaciers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353 Alexander ab Alexan<lro on the Flood as the cause of fossil remains .. .. .. .. . .. .. . .. .. 391 Allan, Thomas, Contributions of, to paleo-
botany ............ ··•··· "· .. . . ...... ...... 404 Alport; S......... . . , ....................... 214 Amber Flora........... --·-·· . ............ 415~ 418
, Age of the ...... ~--... . . . . .. . . •.. . . 418 , Origin and nature of...... .. • .. .. .. 403 ;--Vegetable inclusions in ........... 415,-418 Amber-tree ..... ---~--··· .•.•.• ._............ 403, 418

Page. Amia ...... ...... ...... ...... ....... .... ... 255 Amphibolites studied microscopically,..... 211 Ancient glaciers Of the Sierra Nevada...... 327
shores, Recognition of....... .. . . . . 122 Ancients; causes of their ignorance........ 388
; passages supposed t.o indicate their acquaintance with fossil wood, etc_ .. . .. . . .. . . . .. .. . .. . . . 387
, Knowledge and· opinions of the, relating to fossils .......... 386,393, 398 wholly ignorant of vegetable petrifactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
Andra, Dr. C. J.... ... . .. . . ... ... .. . . .... .. . 416 .Andrews, Dr. Edmund, on wave action..... 88 Angiosperms...... .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 433
, Development of the...... . . . . 448 Animikie rocks ... 182, 187,192, 193,196, 197, 203-205
206, 207, 215, 218, 224 225, 226, 227, 228
series, The ..................... 203-205 Annularia established by Sternberg.. . ..... 428
regarded by Lindley and Hutton as a dicotyledon........... 430 Romingeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 445 sphenophylloides mistaken by Lehmann for a fossil Aster . . 396
Anthotypolithes -.. .. .. ...•... .. . . . ... .. . ... 427 Apetalre .................. . ................ 433, 449
Aplin, S.A ...... --------'· ........... ...... 6 Appalachian Division, The................. 4-8 Archrean Formations of N. W. States; Prof.
R. D. Irving .. __ ............... 175-242 Rocks studied by Prof. R. D.
Irving ....... .................. xxii Areas of adverse, doubtful, and favombl'e
probabilities for artesian wells .......... 172-173 Archreus, or spirit of the un~verse......... 389 Aristotle's doctrine of generatio requivoca. 386, 389
conceptions of time limits . . . . . . 398 Arlington Prairie, Wisconsin; St. Peter's
sandstone .............. . ................223, 224 Arnold, Theodore, on the origin of fossils . . 390 Artesian wells, Art of sinking............ . 169
, Chicago, Ill................ 133 , Conditions of ............. 125-173 ; confining stratum above . . . 139
below . . . 138 , Cost of..................... 170 , Decline of :flow in ....... 157-165 , Denver, Col. ............... 45, 151 , Essential features of....... 134
453

454

INDEX.

•

Page.

Page.

Artesian wells, Fond du Lac, Wis . . . . . . . . . 143 Benton County, Minnesota... ,,............ 200

, Increasing flow in ........ 154, 155_ Berger, Reinhola, on the fruits and seeds of

, Irrigation by ... :. . . . . . . . . . 148 the Carboniferous formation ..... • ...... 420, 421

, Limits to depth of . . . . . . . . . 167 Bernadou,Jobn B., U. _S.N ................. 32

, Oshkosh, Wis . ...... .. .. .. 143 Bernardo glacier, .Alaska.................. 352

, Palmyra, Wis . ..... ... .. .. 143 Bianconi, Giuseppe G., on the determina-

; prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . · 135 tion of leaves by their nervation . .. .... 380, 420

, Rate of delivery iil . . . . . . . . 154 Bibliography of North American geology ... xxx

; superiority of oil region

Bibliolithi, Bibliolithes... . . ........... .426, 427, 428

methods.................. 169 Bien, Morris . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

; typical -examples......... . . 134 Big Fork River..... .. . .. .. . . .. . . . .. . . .. . . .. 206

; use of the diamond drill . . . 169 Big Stone Lake ................ .'............ 200

, Watertown, Wis . . . . . . . . . . 143 "Big tree" of the Sierras..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 448

Artificial vs. Natural systems of classifica·

Bilobites rugosa .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. •. . .. . 444

tion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 432 Binney, Edward William ....... ............. 369

Artis, E . T.; "Antediluvian Phytology " .. 405, 406

, Contributions of, to paleobotany

Artisia ....... ... ...... .... .... ·.... .. ... . . . 447

412, 415, 420, 421

A .shland County, Wisconsin ...... 213, 216, 232, 235

,SketchoL .......................... 374

Asplenium.·............................... . 428 Biographical sketches of the leading paleo-

Aster Amellus ... . . . . .. . .• .... .. . . . . . . . . . . . 396 . botanists ..... ........................... 368-385

montanus, L ehmann's supposed

Biology, Interrelations of Geology and...... 363

fossil .. •••. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396 Birge, E . .A................................... 28

Sibiricus .................. " ... . .... · 396 Birney, T. W ............................... 6,14

.Asterophyllites .......................... .428, 430 Black Bay, Lake Superior.................. 234

Atkins,J.D ...................... .... ...... 11

River Falls, Wisconsin, Potsdam ae-

Augite schists studied microscopically . . . . . 211

des.......................... 224

Auer and Worring's invention of physioty-

Valley . . . . .. . . •. . . . . . . •. •. . . . . . 187

p y .............. ---- · . ·----·.- . ... . . -- .. -. 380

, Ferruginoirs Schists of. 198

Aura seminalis.. ... . ........ ... . .. .... .. . . . 390 Biair, H. B.............. . ................... 6

A ·vicenna proposed vis lapidifica .... ·...... 389, 390 Blake, W. P., on Stikine River glaciers ... 349, 352

Azolla...• .......... .. .. .•.. .... . .. . ...•. .432, 438 Biind .R,iver ........................... 187, 189, 227

Bloody Canon moraines . . .. .. .. . . .. .. . . . . . . 328

Bad River .......................... : . .195, 228,232 Blumenbach, Johann Friedrich, RaMona!

Ballenstedt; J. G. F., on vegetable fossils... 403 views of, on 1-he nature of fossils .... 394, 395, 399

Bar, The .................................91, 92-95 Boccone. Paul, Rationa~ views of, on t-he na-

V-shaped ...... ...... ........ ...... 98 ture of fossils . . . . .. .. .. .. . . . .. . . .. . .

fl9!

:Baraboo Quartzite series, The.....•...... .198-199 Bodfish, 8umner H ................... XVIII, 7, 8, 41

region ...... . ................ . 197, 201,229 Bolam glacier . .............. ............... 333, 334

River ....................... .198, 199, 235 Bonne-ville, Lake. (See Lake Bonneville.) :Barrier, The ... · ···'·· ......................87-90 Bonney, T G -~- ...... ~ .......... , .. ·. ..•.•. 221, 240

Barron County, Wisconsin................. 197 Bore, One large or several small ones, for

Barus, Dr. Carl .......... : .... .. ......... XXVII, 62 water supply.............. ..... .. ........ 155

:Bassett, C. C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 14 Bos latifrons beneath ancient glacier'. . . . . . . .354

Basswood Lake ..................... ·.. 205, 207,208 Botanical systems ...........-.............. 433-439

Bauder, F .' Fr., Rational views of, on the

Botanilithcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 427

nature of fossils........................... 395 Botany and pitleobotany ;. independent man-

Bauhin ...... .................. ... ..... 388, 389, 390

nedn which they

Beach, Hon. Horace, on artesian wells .....149,151 , The .. .. ·............................. 87

have heretofore been st-udied . ... 367

Beaumont, Elie de, on wave action .... • .. 76, 79, 89 sandstones . . . . . . . . . . 220

, Interdependence of......... . ..... 366

Beehe. (See De la Beebe.)

Boteler, F. M ... . ..•........................ 5,14

Becker, G. F ..........................·...... XXIV Bowerbank's "Fossil Fruits and Seeds of

, Administrative report of ... .. 47-49 the London Clay"....... . .. .. .. .. .. . .. . . . 413

Beds bearing water . .. . .. .. .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . 135 Braddock's Bay, Lake Ontario, Map. ..... . 94

, Inclination of... . . . . . . 141 -Brain growth ............................ 288-294

confining water . . . . . . .. .• . . . .. •.. . . •. 138

of Dinocerata ............... 284-294

, Height of outcropping . ... ... . .. .. . . 143 Brainerd, Minn., Geological formation at . . 197

, Surface condition of the porous...... 147 Braun, Friedrich, Paleobotanical contribu-

Beechy, Sir F;w ....... : .:......... ....... 354 tions of... ................................ 420 .

Belcher, Sir E., cited on .Alaska glaciers . . . 348 Brewer,·Prof.W. H., on glaciar dirt bilDds.. 319

Bell, W. H., cited on Stikine River glaciers 352

; experiments on sediments......... 62

, Robert ... :. .. .. ............ . .......... 206 Brewster, Patrick, Contributions of, to paleo-

, Canadian maps .. ; .... ·.............._182-205 botany........... .. ...................... 404.

Be:ridire, Capt. Chas ..........': ......... ~... 446 Bridger series.............................. 252 Bentham,J ..•........... .............•.... 436 Brongniart, A ........ ~-- .•....••••••....•.372, 405

P~ge.
Brongniart, A.; fossil plants of Hiir, Sweden. 4M · A. T. ; classification ·of fossil plants ......... .407, 428, 429 ; Contributions of, to paleobotany . .404, 405, 406, 408, 417, 421, 424, 428 division of the geologic series . .·.... . . . . . . . . . . 407 ; distributionofland vegetation ............ .404, 407 ; mode of growth of coal plants . . • •• •. . . . . . . . . 400 , Rank of, as a p aleobotanist .... 368, 369, 406, 407 , Sket ch of.............. 372
Bronn, H. G.; Index Palreontologicns .... .420, 421 Brontotherium beds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254 Brooks, M aj. T. B ............. . ... 190, 191, 193, 229 Brown County, Minnesota ................ 200, 202 :Erown, Robert, on Triplosporites . . . . . . . . . . 421 Bruce Mine Bay, L ak e Huron, quartzite . . . 230 Briickrnann, F. E., on the diluvian origin of
fossil r emains . ..... ...................... 392 Brush, Prof. George J . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 Buch, L. von; mode of growth of coal plant . 400
; n ervation of leaves.......... 380 Buckland, W., Contributions of, to paleo-
botany............ . ...... 405 Buffon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •.. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . 397 Bunbury, Sir C. J. F. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. .. .. 369
, Contributions of, topaleobotany,419, 420 , Sketch of....................... 379 Buttner, D. S., on the diluvian origin of fos-
sil remains. . .. ••• • •• •• •• . • 392
Calamitae . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426 regarded by Walch and Suckow as extinct .............. .. ...... 398
Calamites ........................ .427, 428, 433, 445 California division, The ..•. , ................13, H
r edwood.......... . ...... . ....... 448 Call, R. E .... . ........................ xxnr, 32, 34 Cambrian formation ............. . ......••. 182, 236 Camerarius, Elias, on the origin of fos sils.. 390 Campement d ' Ours I sland g raywacke...... 231 Canon , Tuolumne .... ........ .. .. . ... . ... 316,317 Capel!er, Maurus Antonius, on the tropical
facies of fossil plants ... . ........... ". . . . . 397 Capellini, G................................ 378 Cardiocarpus . ... . ............... .. . . . ... . . . 447 Carl, J. F ., on artesian wells of oil region.. 169
, describes packing support in bored wells·····'............ 159
, describes use of torpedo in oil r egion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . 155
, Samuel, Rational views of, on the nature of fossils............................ 394
Carpenter, P. H., an authority on glaciers.. 309 Carpolithes .............................. .427, 428 Carpolithi....... ... . . ... . . ..... . . ...... ... . 426 Carruthers, William ...... . .......... : ..... 369
; paleobotanicalinvestigations-- 4U , Sketch of...................... 384 Cascade Mountains; Glaciers on the ...... 334~341 Range, Survey of the ..........•.. xxm Casuarinites .••••• : .. . • . .. . . . . . .••••• .••• .. 427

Page.
Catlinite oq)ipestone .••••.. •• . •. . •. . . .. •. . 2Jl Cellular _cryptogams .......... , .......... .429, 432
of Brongniart . . . . . . . . . 429 ; probable fluctuations
in development . . . . . 452 Cerutus, B........ . .................... . ... 393 Chamberlin, T. C................... .... ... XXI
; administrative report .. . ...... 20-24 ; geology of Wisconsin cited.... 197 ; map of Wiseonsin . . .........181, 194 ; the requisite and qualifying
conditions of artesian wells. · 125 Champion mine, Michigan............ . . . . . . 225
Chaney, G. 0............ . .............. . ... 56
Chaplin, J ............................... .. 44
Chapman, R. H............ ................ 6
Chase, H. S .•....... . ...•.••............... 10 Chatard, Dr. Thomas M .............. xxvn, 60,61 Chauvenet, W. M ....... . ....... 25,26,28,205.208 Chemicwork ............. . . . ........ . ... . .. XXVII Chemical impregnations in artesian well
water......... . . . ........................ 166 Chemistry, Division of; administrative re-
port................. . .................... 59 Cherts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229 Chester, Prof. A. H., on Minnesota iron
ore ..................... . .. . 204, 205, 206, 208, 212 Chicag;o artesian stream, Section . ..... . . . . . 133 Chioccus, Andreas, Rational views of, on
the nature of fossils...................... 393 Chippewa County, Wisconsin.. . ........... 197
region .. .................. . . .... 201, 202 Valley .............. .'........... 187, 197 Chlorite Schists studied microscopically .. . 211 Chondrites antiqu~s. ........... ............ 441 Cialai, Alessandro, cited as to waves .. 76, 80, 82, 88 Cincinnati group. . ........ . ........... . .... 182 Clarke, Prof. F . W .......... . .............. XXVII ; administrative report........ . .. . .. . 59 Salem, on motion of Lyell glacier... 324 Classification of archrean rocks of theNorth-·
west..................... 209 fossil plants .. 403, 407,422, 425-431
, Lindley&Hutton on the .409-409
the Cryptogams ......... 437-439 Clathraria.......... ... ... ..... . .. . . ... . .. .. 447 Clay slate from St. Louis River, Minnesota. 233
near Mahtowah, Minn...... 233 studied microscopically.......... 210 Clearwater Lake graywacke. . ............. 234 Cliff of differential degradation............. 112 ,The Sea.............................. 83-8! stream .......................•.. 113 Cliffs .................................... . 112 , Comparison of........·....... . ...... . 115 Club-mosses ... .. ..................... . .... . 433 Coal, Op-inions on the origin of....... .414, 415,421 plants, Mode of growth of . ... . . . . . . . . 400 Colle.cting area of artesian wells . . • . . . . . . . . 145 Co!man, E. T., asc.ended Mount Baker..... 341 Colonoceras .·........... ··: .. • . ~. .. . . . .. . .. -255 Colorado .................... .. . ...• , . . . ..•.. 9 , Economic studies in .............. XXIV ,River. ·......... . ....... .'.......... 249
; GrandCaii.on........ ... ... 113

·4o6

/ INDEX.

Page.

Page.

Colorado River modified by artesian.wells.. . 1'5"0 · Currents;-Shore ..•. ~.~.: ..• .-............... -80,86

Colt,J. D ........ ..... : .................... 9,14

·.·· Wind ...-.....-.• ·.................. 85

.Columbia County, .Wisconsin.198; 2Z3, 224,233,235 Curtice, Cooper, .••• •• . • . .. •. . . ••• . .. . .. .. . 53, 54

River modified by artesian wells - 150 Curtis, -J. S..• .·....•••-.................... xxv, 49

-Columna, F a-bius, Rational views of, on the

Cu'vier .. .......•. .- .·.••.•-........ . .......... 405

nature of fossils . ...................... ~.. 393 Cycadaccre .. . .. . . . . . .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 433

Compendium of P aleobotany, !'reparation

, Development of the .......... 446,447

of a .. ........ ....... :.. . . . . . .. . . . •. . . . . .. 363

Coniferre ... , ... .-. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . . . . •. . . . . . .. 433 Da Costa, Emanuel Mendes, on the diluvian

, D evelopment of the .. . .. . .. . . . . .. 447 origin of fossil remains. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. 392

Contents of Archrean Formations of North-

Dall, W. ·H., on glaciers of Alaska........ . 353-355

western States, paper on, by

Dana Creek .......... : ..... : ........... . ... 316

R.D.Irviug ..-............... 177

Glacier................ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322

Conditions of artesian wells, .a

Prof: James D., cited on terraces .... 112, 236

paper on, byT. C. Chamberlin. 127

Mount ...................... 314, 315, 316,317

Dinocerata, a pap~r on, by 0. C.

Prof. EdwardS .................... xxm, 34

Marsh ...... ------ ..........·.. 245 Dane County, Wisconsin, sandstone . . . . . . . 235

Glaciers of the United States, a

Daniell~, Prof. W. W ................... 27, 28,194

paper on, by I. C. RusselL... 305 Daphnites ................·...... ...... ...... 426

Lake shores, a paper on, by G. K.

Darwin, C_....-... ... . .... . .. ...... .... ...... 43'J

Gilbert ......-....... •. . •.. . .. 71 Darwin, C.C ............................... xxx

Sketch of paleobotany, by Les-

Daubree, A ............ , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220

ter-F. Ward.................. 359 D 'Anbuisson de Voisins on vegetable fossils . 403

Confining stratum above for artesian wells. 139 Davidson County, Minnesota· ... . .. _....... 200

below for artesian wells. 138

, Prof. G.; l\fount Rainier glacier. 334, 335

Contrasted ratios of supply and demand of

found Aleutian glacier. 353

water ... . ... ............... ------- .... .-.. 148 Cook, George H.; conference on map ...... 39 Cope, E. D.; · Wyoming fossils............. 251 Copper River.............................. 217 Corda, August Joseph ............-......... 369
, Contributions of, topaleo.botany 412,417,418 , Sketch of................. . ......... 374 Cordaianthus .. .•...••••• ~--··· .•.... .••••• 447

Dav il a, P. F. , on the indigenous theory of fossil plants.. . . .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . .. 396
·D a Vinci, Leonardo, Rational views of, relatiHg to the nature of fossils. . . . . . . . . . . . . 399
Davis, A. P.:.... :.......................... 11,12 . , C. D .... . :. . •. . . • . . . . . . •. . •• . . . . ••. 15, 18
Dawi>s,' H. L .. .. : .......... :........•• ; ...... 9,14 Dawson, Hr. G. M ....... : . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

Cordaitere . ......... -... .• . •• . . ••...... .• ••. 447 Daw8im, Sit•John William....... ......... 369

Cordaites . .... . . : •. . . . . .••••• .•..••. .• . .•• . 447

, Contributions of, to paleobotany . .416, 424

- Robbii .••... .••••• •...•. .•.. ..... 447

, Sketch of......................... 377

Cornwan, A. B .: ...................... ~... 62 Debey, M. H., on the fossil plants of Aachen 421

Cornwall, En~lanrl, schists .. . . . . . . . • . . . • .. 240 De Candolle, A. P.; geographical ~istribu-

Corpuscula s .1lin.\ of Kircher .....•.....•. : 390

- tion of plants.-- .. -- 366

Corrasion, Acceleration of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117

; nervation of leaves . -- 381

Cor.nihodon :...........•••••.•....•....... 251, 252 ·Decline of flow in artesian wells ·-......... 157-165

beds .-.: ......... . ..-........... 252 ·D efrance, Jacques Louis Marin, Contribu-

Cotta! C. Bernhard von, Contributions of, to

tions of, to paleobotany ....-........ . . . . . . . 405

paleobotany ...... . ..... --~---······...... 410 Degeneration theory of plants . • .. . . . •.. . .. 397

Co.ttonwood County, Minnesota...... .201, 202,233 De la Beebe; Sir Henry Thomas, Contribu: Coulee edge, The ................... ~....... 113 · tions of, to paleobotany............ ..... 405

Cowlitz River runs from a glacier.•••. ·•.••. 335 Delta, The ..................·.. :: ...•.•.. 87, 90, 104

Glacier .. , ......................... 336

fossiL. . . . .... . .................. . 107

Cranial nerves, The............. :. .. . .. . . .. 285

ideal section ................... . 107

Credneria. .•. . .. . . . ... . . . .... .. . .. . . . ... . . . 411 ·

vertical section _. . . . . • . . . . •• . .. . 107

Cretaceous .................••.•.. ~ .... 200, 201, 221 Deluc. (See Luc.)

Crevasses in glaciers ....................... 318 Deluge. (See Flood; -Noachian D eluge.)

Crichton, Sir Alexander; on the climate of

hypothesis ........ ~ ... .... ....... 392, 394

the antediluvian world. .. .. .. .. .. . .. . . . . . 406 Dendrolithus ............................. .426, 427

Crosnier, L ...... . .......••......•.•....... ·220 Descent of plants... ... ..................... 452

Cross, Whitman ..••....••........ XXIV, 44, 46,216 Denver, Colo., artesian wells ............. .45, 151

Cryptogams ...........••••... . ......•..... 432, 438 Desor,.E ., cited as to wave action........... 79

, Cellular .... -............. 429, 438,444 Development in vegetation . . . . .••••. ... . . . . 409

, Classification of the . . . . . . . . . . 437 Devil's Lake,· Wisconsin . .......... .-•••.•.. 223, 224

, va·scular : •• .-. .-~; .•••...••••. 429,438 Devonian, Flora of the .....••••.••.• •....... 445

Cucumites ......·.................... .-...... 413 Diaba8e defined............................. 215

<;:ummins, R. T ····~·--···················· 13

porphyrite defined................. 2l5

- Cup Butte, Lake Bonneville ....•...•...... 98 -Diagrams illustrating the development of

Currents, Off-shore ........................ . 90

plant life ...•.•.••.••••.•••..361, 442

I

. I.ND~X.

·457

Page.

Page.

···Diagrams, P.is.<:ussion of... , . , . : .••• . .... , .443-452 Divis~OJ;I o( faleontology,.Ad,ministra.tive re-

Diamond drill for artesi.an wells............. 169

port , ..•. , ._... :. .•. : . . . . . . . . . . 49-S()

. Peak glacier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 341 .

Quaternary Geology, Adminis~

Diastrophism as related to topographic re-

trative report ·.-.........•.... 20-24

. liefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

.the Pacific, .Administt·ative .re-

defined . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . 118

port .. , ....•....•......•...•••. 47-i9'

Dick sonia, supposed fossil ................·.. 402

, The Appalachi;tn...... . . . . .. . . ... . ·4-8

Dicot-yledons ..•........ ...•............·... .429, 433

California .. _.....•_.... . . .. . . 13, 14-

, Arrangement of the divisions

Montana ..... ..•.. . .• •. ...._ . 9'

. ofthe...... ........... .... .431,450

New England................ 3-4-

, Development of the ......... .448, 449

Wyoming.... ................. 10

Diller, J. S ~ ...............••..•.. XXIII, 42, 23\i, 341 DodgeCounty, Wisconsin .... . . ..... . .... . 199

Dinoceras beds. ·...• ....•. ,_..... ..... .. . .... 252 Dossetter, E.,.photographed .Alaska glaciers 352

lacustre......................... 251 Douglas, E. M . . . . . . • • . . • • • • . . • • . . • • • . • . • •. 11, 12

laticeps ........ ................. 251 Drifting sand; dunes ..... ................. 99, 100

mirabile......................... 251 Drift; Shore .... _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •. . . . . . . 86, 87

; lower jaw ....•.............•. 273-277 Drill, Diamond, for artesian wells........ .. . 169'

skull . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256 Drilling, Interpretation of.................. 172

; frontal bones .......... 260-262

Recordof......................... 170

; lachrymal bones . . . . . . . . 266 Driven wells............................... 17(}

; molar bones............. 265 Dromocyou .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . .. . .. .. . . .. .. . . .. 25~

; maxillaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266 Dulac, Alleon, on the exotic character of the

;· nasal bones............. 258

ferns of Saint Etienne..... . ...... . ...... 397

; occiput .............. . . 2il3-265 Duck Point, Grand Traverse Bay ...... : . . . 06-

; palate ................. 267-269 Dunes ..................... _............ 97, 99, 100

; palatine bone . . . . . . . . • . 269 Dunker, ·wilhelm, Contributions of, to pale-

; parietal bones . . . .•.... 260-262 ; premaxillaries . ....... . . 266 ; prenasal bones.......... 259 ; pterygoid bones ....... 270-272

obotany ..... : .......... .... .... .. ...... 419' Dunnington, A. F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . 5 Dutton, Capt. C. E . . . . . . .. .. . .. .. . . . . .. .. . . XXIII
; administrati>e report .. 42,43:

; squamosal bones... . . . . 265 Du>al,.S.R ......... ...... ................. 4,14; vomers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272

; teeth ... . .. . :. . . . . . . . . . . • . . . • . . 277 Eagle Harbor, Michigan, Sandstone at .... 237-240

; canines ....... .. : ...... 279-281 Eakins, L. G .........•.•....... ,. ........... 44

; incisors ........••.... .271, 278 Earth augers............................... 170

; lower molars. . . . • • •. . . . . 283

shaping.. -- - ... . ........... ......... . 78, 79>

• ; upper molars . . . . . . . . . . . 282 East N eebish Island . .. . ............... 223, 224, 231 Dinocerata . ............................... 243-il02 Eau Pleine River ........ :...... . ............ 194

· first found.......... ............ 249 Echo River quartzite....................... 231 ,.The forelimbs of. . . . . . . . ..... 298-300 Eccles; James; cited on Wind River glaciers ·34~

hind limbs of............. 300-302 Eimbeck, \V. ; as to Jeff Davis glacier . . .. 342, :143Dioonites . . . . • . . . . . . . •. • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447 Elk ~iver .... . . . . . . . . . . .. ........ ....... .. . . 197

Diorite defined.............................. 215 Ellis, 'William . . . .. . . . .. . . .. . •. . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

Diplacodon beds ......•.......... _. .. . .. . . . 252 Embankments ., ....... ,. _..•................ 90-99>

Director, Report of the ..•..... ~ .. ; ... XVII-XXXVI Emergenc·e, Submergence and, of shores... 110

Dirt-ba-nds in.glaciers . .. . . . .... .. . .. ... . . . . 319 Emmons, S. F ...•. . ... . .... -.· ...... XVIII, XXIV, 9

Discrimination of shore features, The ...... 112

; administrative report .. .. .... ... . 43-47

Discussion of diagrams of the development

quotes Gen. Kautz on glaciers..... 335-

of plant life ............................ .443-452

on glaciers, Mount Rainier. . . . . . . . . 33~

Distribution. of wa>e-wrought shore feat-

Em_pedocles on the origin of vegetable life. 393

.. ures ...•.................101-103 Empire Biuff, Lake Mic-higan .............. 93; 103

wells, Advantageous .·..... 156 Endogenites ........ . •.... ........ ..... ... 408; 428

District of Columbia, Work in ......•.......

Engelhardt, H., Paleobotanic_a.l work of.... . 424-

the Great Basin................. XIX Engler on the geographical distribution of

Pacific . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . XIX plants .... .·..• .............•.•.... . . . . . . . . 366-

Diversity of rock texture causes irregularity

E!ila.rgem,ent of feldspar fragments in cer-

in erosion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • •• 75

tain Keween:;~.wan sand-

Division, G.eneral OTganization. of the geo-

stones ......_ . ·~ .......... 237-245-

graphic ......... .... .......... .

mineral fragments in cer-

of Chemistry, .Administrative re-

tain detrital rocks....... 218

port. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 Eobasileus .............•.......·... . ........ 251

Geography, The. .. . ........... 3-14 Eopteris Morierii ...• .". •. . . . • . • •. . . . . . . . . . . 445-

Mining Statistics and Technol-

Eozoon Canadense .....•••••.....•. ·"··. -~. 444

ogy .•..............•.....·.. . 63-64 · Ephedra _antisyphilitica. ..••.• : . ..•..•... , •. 433.

'458

INDEX·.

Page.

Page. .

,~qu~lization of supply in ~ells ..•••... : .•-.. · 149 Flowers, Fossil ................... :_._ .. 396,·404; 426

Eqmsetacere , . . . . . . •• . . . . . . . . . . . • •. . . . . . . . 445 .Folded Schists north and east of Lake Su-

Equisetinere -- -···-·----~--- · ·--····_. ____ ;_ 4'}3 perior ............ .. .......... . .. ·: . .. .. . . . 205

, Development of the.......... 445 '·Fontaine, W. M.·; work in the fossil floras of

Equisetum .....·-...........·.. . . . • • . . . . . . . . . 438 Virginia .... .... ........ _.... ............. 42-!

giganteum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398 Forbes, Prof. J. L ., imauthorityonglaciers.309, 319

Equivalency of Penokee and Marquette

Forelimbs of Dinocerata, The ...•........ 298-300

rocks ................ : :"· ···· · -······-··· 195 Fossil fauna of Eocene lake region, Vvyo-

Eratosthenes on the significance of fossil

mi.ng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250

shells .........•......... :................ 386

Western Americaolderthan

Erni, Dr. Henri-··------ .--··········· · ··.··· 60

in corresponding rocks in

Eruption causes irregularity of erosion . .. . 76

other hemisphere.. _.... . 252

Etuptive origin of certain Huronian rocks. 242

floras, Conditions affecting . . . . . . . . . 443

Escape of water at levels lower than the-well 153

flowers .....•...... . ........... 396,404, 426

Essential features of artesian wells ......... 131-173 Etting.shausen, Baron Constantin von, Con-

fruits--·----·---···········--·------ 426 glaciers in Alaska_ ................ 354, 355

tributions of, to paleobot-

leaves ..... . ........................ 426

any .......... . ......... .423, 424

plants; number of known species at

, Discoveries of, in phytogeog- ·

different dates . .407, 416, 417,421,

raphy .................·. . . 366

422, 424, 428

, Rank of, asapaleobotanist.368, 369

; how preserved.............. 439

, Sketch of . ................. 380

roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 426

Eureka, Nevada, sandstone.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235

stalks .......... •. .. __ ... _... . . . . . . . . 426

Existing glaciers of the United States...... 303

trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426

Exogenites .. ......... . , ..... .... .......... _ 428

wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426

Exotic theory of fossil plants . . . ..... 396, 397,427 Fossils, Early theories of the origin of . .. 389, 390

Extermination theory of fossil plants . .. . .396, 398 Foster and Whitney cited.......... ........ 191

Extinct species, Fertility of the conception

Richard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55, 56

of . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 398 Fountain h ead of artesian wells. . .. .. . . . . . . 144

l!'racastorius, Rational views of, on the na-

Fairchild, B. L . ............................. . lil Farmington, Utah; view of Wasatch Mount-
ains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 Faujas de Saint Fond, Barthelemy, Contri-
butions of, to paleobotany .. , . . .. . ...... .400, 402 Fault scarp, -The .......................... 113-115

ture of fossils .................... -- .. . . . . 399 Fragaria, Supposed fossil . . . • •. •. . . . . . . . .. . 396 Franklin, Sir John_........................ 354 Fremont's Peak glacier ...............••.. 344-347 Friction in artesian wells ....... . . . . . . . . . . . . 157 F _umaria, Supposed fossil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396

scarps and shore lines at the base of

the Wasatch ................ ~ --···. 114 Gabbro defined . ............................ 215

terraces ... . .... .......... .·. . . . . . . . . . 118 Gallium (= Galium), Supposed fossil....... 396

Fauna, Fossil, Eocene lake region, Wyo-

Gamopetalre ............... ·............... 433, 450

ming . ............. . .. .... ..... :. . . . . . . . . . 250

, Position of the .............. 431, 450

F ehr, H .... . ......................... , . . . • . . 28 Gannett, Henry...... .. . .. . .. . ... . . .. . • . . .. 35

F elsites and felsitic porphyries studied mi-

; administrati~e report .... : 3-14

croscopically... . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2H

s. s.---- --- .. ---.--- ... ---.-."' ...4, 5,12

Ferns ... ............. .... .. .. .. ... ........ ~ 432 Gannister of Yorkshire ................... 219, 222

·, Development of the......... ........ . 445

Marquette, Mich............. 225

, Early appearance of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 445 Gardner, T. C., on ice blades .............. 325, 326

Ferruginous Schists of the Black River Val-

Garlick, S. A .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . 11, 12

ley, Wisconsin. .. . ....... . ....... .... .... 198 Garrett, LeRoy M....... .. .. .... ........... 10

]'icoides. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428 Geiger,H.R .................. "·····-----XXVI, 51

Filices . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 432 Geikie, A ......................... 210, 227,228, 23ti

Filicites ...............................•.. .427, 428

, on terraces...... . . . . • . . . . .. .. •. •.. . 112

·Financial statement .. ...... ·........ __ . .... XXXVI Geinitz, Hans Bruno . ...................... 369

Fissured and channeled water-bearing beds . 135

, Contributions of, to paleobotany.. 412

Flabellaria ........... , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428

, Sketch of...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. . 374

Flathead Mountains, Gla.ciers of . . . . . . . . . . . 347 General organization of the geographic di-

Fletcher, L. C................ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Flood plains and stream terraces . .......... 116 · Generatio requivoca, Doctrine of........... 386

theory of fossil remains .. ... 390, 391, 397, 398 Genetic problems in Northwest .A:rchrean.. 185

, Defenders of the .... 392, 393,402,408 Geognostico-botanical view of-the plant-life

, Different ways in which fossil

of the .globe.............................. 439

;plants were explained by the 395,396. Geographical distribution of plants . . . . . . . . . 366

Flow, Control of, in wells...... . . . . . . . . •. . •. 157 Geography, Division of . --.. ..... . .. .. .. .. . 3-14

, Height of, in artesian ~ells. . . . . . . . . . . 159 Geologic map.of Northwest,. Preliminary_·_ 187

, Methods of increasing, in artesian

the United States; Prelim-

wells...................... .. . . . . . . . 154

inary ...................XXVIII

INDEX.

45·9·

Pltge. Geologic record, Defectiveness of the, in fos-
sil plants ......-.... -......• . ... 439, 450
work ....•....••. .'................ _ xx
Geologicat report of Wisconsin, cited . . . . . . 199 Geology and biology, Interrelations of..... 363
of Canada, cited .... . . ..... ~ •....·.. 187 , Origin of the science of strati-
graphical................ ...... 398 Gerhard, C. .A ..... -......................... 219 Germar, E. F., on the Carboniferous flora of
W ettin and LobE>j iin ... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 416 Germ-t)leory of the origin of fossils ... . .. 389, 390 Gesner on petrified wood ........... .. ..... 388, 391 Gibraltar Bluff, Wisconsin................. 224 Gibson, A.M .... .. ........ . .............. XXVI, 53 Gigantic mammals of the Dinocerata ._..... . 243
Gilbert, G. K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxn
; administrative report . ...... 30- 34 • as to Jeff Davis glaciers . . . . 343 ; t-he topographic features of
lake shores ....... . ....... 69, 123 , visited glaciers of U.S... . .. 315 Glacial motion; Muir cited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324 Glacial phenomena ........•............... 317-323
; Prof. T. C. Chamberlin. XXI records, Nature of................. 313 Glaciated surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322 Glaciation causes irregularity of erosion . . • 76 Glacier, Bolaen................ ......... _ 333, 334 movements measured ......... .. . 322, 324 mud................................ -322 tables ......... . ... . .............. .319, 320
; largest found . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . 320 on Parker Creek glacier...... 319 , What is a ......................... 309 Glaciers, .Alaska .• . ..........•............ 348, 355 , Aleutian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353 ,Alpine ............ .. ..... :...... . 309 , .Ancient, of the Sierra Nevada.... 327 , Characteristics of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309 , Continental...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309 , Crevasses of. ... ........ ...... .. .. -318 , D efinition of...................... 311 ,Dirtbandson ..................... 319 , Elevation of, in the High Sierra.. 315 ,Existing, of the Sierra Nevada ... 314 , :Fossil, in Alaska........... . . ..... 359 in the Wind River Mountains... . 326 ,MonntJefferson .................. 341
Shasta ....••........••.. 329- 334 of Northern California . .. . . . . . . . . 329
the Cascade Mountains......... 329 Sierra N evada............. 319 United States, Existing .. 303-355
Glossopteris Phillipsii ....... .. .. ...... . ... 417 Gneisses studied microscopically . . . . . . . . . . 213 Gnetacere .......•••••.................... .433, 448 Gogebic formation . . • . • . •. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
.Lake .......•••....•.......... 194, 195, 196
Gooch, Dr. F. A., ····~·-·· .......... xxvn, 19,60
Goppert, Heinrich Robert, Contributions of, to paleobotany..•. 412, 414, 415,416, 418,
419, 421, 422, 423 , Rank of, as a paleobotanist .. 368, 369,411 , Sketch of..... . • • . . • . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 373

Page.
Gore, Prof. .r. Howard . .••• "·•····• ...•••••xv:m, 6
Grand Canon of the Colorado ..•.... ~ .....113; 234 Marais . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207 Portage Bay, Lake Superior . . . . . . . . 203 Rapids, Wis., Potsdam sandstone.... 224 'Eury,C ........._........ .. ...-....... .397 ; investigations into the Carboniferous flora of France. 424
Grandfather Bull Falls....... ..... . :. . . . . . . 194 Granger, E., on coal plants -at Zanesville,
Ohio ....... . _. . . . .......................·. 404 Granites studied microscopically........... 2l3 Grant County, Wisconsin, sandstone....... 2;)5 Gray, .Asa, on the geographical distribution
of plants ........ ........................366,436 Graywackes .............. : ... .... 210, 231, 232, 234 Great Basin, Glaciers on mountains of...... 342
Salt Lake, Sheep Rock............... 84 Green River series ................... . 249,252,254 Greenstones studied miscroscopically...... 214 Greywackes. (See Graywackes .)
Grisebach, .A. H. R., on the geographical dis-
tribution of plants .. . .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . 366 Griswold, W. T....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 7 Gunflint Lake ............ 186, 203, Z04, 205,206,207 Gutberlet, W. C. J., cited .. . .. .. . .. . . .. . .. .. 220 Gutbier's contribut~ons to paleobotany..... 415 Guyot, .A................................... 376 Gymnosperms .. .. .. .. .. . .. . . •. . .. . .. . .. .. . 433
Hackett, Merrille .................... , .. . . 7 Hagen, K. G., on the origin of amber...... 403 Hague, _.Arnold .......... : ............ . xx, 216, 221
, cited on Moun~ Hood glacier . . . . . . 339 ; Yellowstone National Park Snn·ey. 15-19 Haight, 1'. W................ .. .. .. .. .. . .. 28 Hall, C. W .. ...• . ..... ...... 26, 28, 197, 201, 202, 208 , Prof. J ame_s; conference on map..... 39
, R eport of,on fossil plants ofFremont'sexpedition 417
, W. H., on artesian wells..... . ........ 151 Hallock, Dr. William ........ . , ... xxvnr, 15, 16, 62 Rapper, .John S ... . .. ............ ....... ... 7
Hawes, G. W ............................. 214, 236 Hayden, E. E., U. S. N., Diagrams prepared
by........ . ............ . .... .4?, 58, 442 Dr. F. V _............... , ... :XXI, 202, 377
; administrative report. .. 28-30 , on glaciers.............. 344 Heer, Oswald, Contributions of, to paleobot.an.v ................. 419, 424 geographical distribution of plants.. 366 , Rank of, as a pal E>obotanist ......... 368, 369 Sketch of.................... .. . . ... 378 Heliobatis bolls .. :..... ......... ......... 252 Helaletes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255 H enry Mountain sandstone, Utah.......... 235 H erodotus on -the meaning of fossil shells 3~6, 398 .Hester, W. B .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. •.. .. 13 Hey!, A. B......................... ........ 14 Righter . . . . ... . . .. . . . .. .. . . .. . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . 413 Hillebrand, W. F .............-..... ...... XXIV, 46 Hillers,J.K....................... . ........ 58 Hind limbs of Dinocerata............... . . 300-302 Hippuris, Supposed -fossil •• -• . _............. 396, 401

··460

,.INDEX.

Page.

Page.

Historic~! revi_ew of paleobQtani~al dis-

~rving, Prof., ;R. .:P., op. ~n ii;J.vestigat.ion of

, covary .•.........••....· ....•....••....... , . . ~68 the Archooan formations of ~he North-

Hitchcock, Prof. C. H .•.•.•...••........ XXVIII, 35 western States ......... : .. .•••. _....... _- . 175-242

, E., on t erraces,. ....... . ........ 112 Ishpeming .................................. 217, 218

Hoff, K. E. A. von, on petrified w:ood . . . . . . . . 402 Hoffman ,_C. l!' ....•• ....... .... ... .......... . 47

~~~:~:~~~~~~iti~~- ~ ~~ ~ ~:: ~:: ~~~ ~~:: ~~ ::~~~~~ ~ '38 ::~

, John D ... ..........._......... . XIX, 14,47

Holman, Paul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Holmes, W. H. , on glaciers ...•••••.. ..... .. 344-347 Holt, R .... .. --·.. . . . . . . .. . .. . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Hook, Robert, Ratioual views of, {)n the na-
. ture of fossils.............. ..393 Hooked Spits, The, produced by wave ac- tion ..................... 91, 95-96 Rooker, J. D ., on the geographic distribu-
tion of plants . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . 366 , Paleobotanical contributions of... _421 Hopkins, W., cited as to curr ent power . .... 89 Hornblende-gabbro defined .. . . . . .. .. .. . .. . 215 Hotlum glJJ>cier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333 Humphreys, Mount...... ....... ... ........ 314 Hunt. T. S. , on geologic form ations ..._.188, 196, 203 Huron, Lake . .181, 185, 186, 1 89, 190, 195, 196, 204,
210, 216, 218, 224, 225, 2213, 227, 228, 230, 231, 236, 237 Huronian areas, Investigations in . . . . . . . . . 187 , The original, of Murray and Logan............... 187 formation ......... 182, 183, 184, 185, 186,_
188, 190, 194, 195, 196, 199, 201, 202, 203, 204,
205, 206, 209, 210, 211,

J ackson County, Wisconsin, sandstone.... 235 , W. H ...... . . : .......... ~ . : ....... 15,16
.Jacob, Ernest ....... . . .............. _. .... . 43 J aeger, Georg Friedrich, Contributions of,
to paleobotany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406 Jaspers .. ... ·. . .............. .. ............ 228; 229 Jeff Davis Peak glacier :_... : ... ...... ... _342, 343 J efferson County, ·wisconsin .. _.. .'._ ...... _ 199 John, Dr.J. F., on amber· : .................. 403 Johnson, L. C . .._.............. ·- ... __ ...... XXVI, 51
'w. D ....-. . . . .......XIX, 30, 31, 32, 34,315
Jukes, Prof. J. B., cited on schist. __ .. _. . . . . 241 Julien, A . A., cited .............. ...... 192, 214, 215 Juneau County, Wisconsin . .... __ ...... . .. . 223 Jusslen, Adrieii de, method of........ .423, 431,435
, A . L., M ethod of.••. . . _•..... .423, 431, 434 Antoine de, on the exotic character
of the coal plants of Saint Chaumont ... 397 possible extinction of plants. 398 Jussien, Bernard de, .Arrangement by, of the plants in the garden of the Triano!-~···... 425

212, 215, 216, 218, 220,

222, 223, 224, 225, 226, Kame, The, or Osar, contrasted with shore

227,228, 229, 230, 231, ri<lges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121

234, 236, 237 Karl, Anton ....... . ....... .. .... XVIII, 9, 44, 45, 46

, M etamorphism in . . . . 241 Kantz, General August V., found glaciers

Hutton, J.; Plntonian theory.. .•.••.... .-.. 398 on Mount Rainier ....................... 334, 335

Hyatt; Prof. .Alpbeus . . . . . .. . . .. .. . . . . . . . .. 54 K eller, H., cited on formation of bea~.:lles . _. 77

H ydro-mica-schists studied microscopically. 212 Kentmann, Johannes, on leaf-incrustations

H yopsodns . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255 in tufa................................... 389
Hyrachyus...... • • •. ••• • •• . . •. • . • . . . . . . . . . . 255 Kerr, .Mark B ... _...... .............. o...... 13

, Prof. W. C .. ...................... XVIII, 4, 5

Ice py-ramids, Glacial .. .••..... •.•...•..•. 320, 321 Kettle River---··· ......_..•._....•... ·--·--. 197

tongues .. ... ... . ••.._........•.••• ~...... 323 K eweenaw Point, Michigan ...... 223, 228, 234, 235

Ice-work the shore wall............ . ....... 109 K eweeuawan rocks .••••• 182, 184,185, 195,201,202,

-Iddings, J.P ..................... 15,18, 19,216,221

203, 213, 214,215

illustrations accompanying sketch of paleo-

Kieser, Piet:rich Georg, on the structure of

botany ... . ........................... _.. . 361 coniferous wood .......•.•......·.. , ....... 402

Imperatns on the dilnvian origin of fossil re-

King, Clarence...... . . . . . . .. . . . .. . .. . . . . . .. 47

mains ...... . .............. -....... . . ---· 391

; Mount Shasta glacier . . . . . 329

Indigenous theory of fossil plants .. 395, 396, 426, 42i

, Mount................... .. . . .. .. .. .. 314

Interde~endence of botany and paleobotany. 366 Kingfisher Lake .. ... ..... . . .. 186, 207, 208, 210, 234

. parts in beach forma-

Kircher, A.; theory of the origin of fossils . 390

tion .................. 83,87 Kirchner, L.A...... . . . . . • . .. .. . . .. •. .. . .. . 382

Interrelations of geology and biology . •. . . • 363 Klein, Balthasar, on p etrified wood.. ...... 389

Invertebrate paleontology ._ ........ ___ . . _.. 363

, Rational views of....... 393

Investigation of Northwestern Archooan

Knife Lak e ............... 186, 207, ~08,. 210, 227,234

formations, Scope of ........._....... . . . . . 181 Kochlin-Schlumb erger ..._...... ......... . . - 375

Iron River silver belt ....................... - 228 Konwakiton glacier............ . . .. . . . • . • . • 333

bearing series Marquette and Menom-

Kotzebue Sound glaciers . . .. . . .. . . .. . .. .. . . 354

inee ............._._.. _............... 189-194 KrUger, Johan-n GottJob, on vegetable fos-

Irrigation by a_rt!lsian wells ~ ........_...... 148_

sils ........... ........... ...... ~ ........ 403

Irving, Pro:f. R._D •••.... .•...•. , .......••.. _ XXII Kundmann-. J. C., Rational :views of,: on the

; administrative report.. . 24-28

natu]."e of fossils. - .._._,....... .... . . • . . • . . 39-i

INDEX.

46i

Page.
Kurr, .Johann Gottlob, on: the .Jurassic flora of Wiirttemberg ........ ~..... ... ........ 416
Kutorga, 8 ,; contribution to paleobotany. 415
Lacbnittnd, F., on the can e of petrifaction. 390 Lake,A gamok ........... ................ . 207
, Basswood ................... .... 205, 207, 208 , Big Stone.......... . . .. .. . .. .. . . . .. .. 200 Bonneville . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . 76-81
, An island of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96 , cliffs and terraces of ... 98, 99, 110 ; Cup Butte.... ............ 96 ; V-bars of.............. ... 98 shore; ma.p................. 95 Clear Water .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 234 , D evil's . . .. .. . .. . .. . . .. .. .. . . . .. .. . .. 223 Gogebie .. .. .. . .. , . .. .. . ...... 194, 195, 196 , Great SaJt., Sheep Rock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84 Huron . 181, 185, 186, 189, 190, 195, 196, 204,210, 21~. 218, 225, 226, 227, 228, 230, 231, 236, 237 , Kin gfisher .............. 186, 207, 208, 210, 234 , Knife . .............. 186, 207, 208, 210, 227, 234 , Michigan.; rectification of coast-map. 103 , Mille Lacs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197 , Mono ....................... 314, 315, 316, 317 ,Moose ............................... 213 , Mountain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 , No r~h . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •..• ". ,. . . . . • 204 , Numakagon . . . •. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 194 of the Woods ....... ....... ......182, 205, 208 , Ogishkiemuncie .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 207 Ontario, Map of Braddock's Bay...... 94 ,Owen's ........ ,. ·. ..... .............. 314 , Rove . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 , 8aganaga ............... 203, 204, 205, 207, 215 , Seneca, deltas........................ 108 shores, The topographic features of... 69 Superior...•.•. ~ .... 182, 184, 192, 196, 201; 203,
204, 206, 207, 209, 211, 215,
217, 218, 23 1, 233, 234, 235 , Head of;· maiJ.... ... . .. .. ... 94 · , ·trough synclinal ... . . . ... . . . 198 T ahoe ................. .. ·............. 314 , Teal, Michigan................. . . . . •. 232 Lamination of glaciers .... .... . , .. .. .. .. .. . 318 Land sculpture; composite nat-ure of..... ~.. 75 · terrace, The............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 118 Landslip cliff, The .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. .. .. .. . 115 Landslips in Marsh Valley, Idaho.......... 120 Lange, Nicholas, on the origin of fossils... 390 , indigenous t-heory of fossil plants... 396 Lasaulx, A. von ... . .. .. ... . ............. 219, 220 Laurentian.................... ........... 185 Lawrence, P. H............................ 219 Leakage, Lateral, in wells....... .. . ........ 157 LeConte, .J., cited on Lyell glacier . . ...... 325, 326 Leedning Creek glacier.. .................. 316 Lehman-n, .J. G., on the supposed fossil Aster
montap.us.. •• .. . .. . .. .. . 396 , Services of, to stl'atigraphic
geology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Z99 Leibnitz, G.W. ;, great physical changes in
the earth.. .. .. . .. .. .. .. 39& , on exotic character of fossil
plants ........ _........... 396

Page.

Leibnitz, G. W., on the nature of fossils

394

, The "Protogrea" of . ......... :. .. 399

Leidy, .J., Wyoming fossils ................ 251, 255

L emuravus ... ~ ............... . ............ 255

Leonhard, K. C. von........................ 400

L epidodendron . .. .... . ........ . . ....... 433, 438

established by Sternberg.... 428

,Fruitof.................... 421

Lepidopbytes ......• ........ ..... ...... .- ... .43-8

Lepidosteus...... . .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. . . . .. .. . 255

Lesley, .J. Peter; conference on map.... . . . 39

Lesquereux, Leo, Collection from ..: . . . . . . . . 57

, Contributions of, to paleo·

botany .... .416, 420,424, 445, 446

, Rank of, as a paleobotan-

ist .... ..... . ........... 368, 369

, Sketch of........ .. . .. . .. 376

Lesser, Friedrich Christ., on the tropical

facies of fossil plants . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. 397

Lherozite defined .. .. .. . .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 217

Lhwyd, Edward, on fossil plants .......... 389, 425

, on the origin of fossils .. 3!10, 391

Libavius, Germ theory of, for tJe formation

of fossils ...................... 389, 390

Library .................................... xxrv

·Ligulatae .... . .. ... .................. 433, 438, 446

Limbs of Dinocerata, The fore ... . ..... . . .298-3QO

, The bind ............ 300- 302

Limestones................... ............. 218

Limnohyus ..................... .. :........ . 255

Limnofelis .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 255

Lincoln Peak, Nevada...... .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. . 342

Lindley and Hutton; classification of fossil

plants ....... ..... .429, 430

; fossil flora of Great

Britain . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408

on the mode of growth ·

of coal plants. . . . . . . 400

, Skeptical views of. .. 409, 410

Lines ofdescent inthedev.elopmentofplants, 452

Linnreau system of botanical classification, 433, 434

Lister, Martin, Rational views of, on the na-

ture of fossils .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . ... . 394

Lithant hracites . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . ... .. . .. . . . 427

Lithobiulia................................. 426

Lithocnlmi................ .......... .... .. . 426

Litbocarpi .. . . .. . . . . .. .. . .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. . . 426

Lithodeuuron .... . .. . . .. . .. .. •.. .. .. .. .. . . . 426

Lithopbylla .... .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. . .. . . .. 426

Lithophylli....... ... .... .. .. .. ........ ... .. 426

Litbo}:Jbyllon . . - f. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :. . ..... ...

426

I.ithophytes . .. . ................ .. .- .. .-...... 426

Lithoxylithes .... .. ..•• . • .... .. ... .. ... . . .. 427

Litboxylon .................... ............ 425, 426

Little Falls, Minn ..................... 197, 212, 213

Little Fork River . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206

Little Iron River, Michigan; graywacke... 234

Littoral current .. .. .. . .. .. .. •.. .. .. •.. .. . .. 85

deposition ........................ 90-100

erosion .. . .. ·- .. .. .. . .. . .. . .. .. .. .. . 80~85

transportation ..... :.. ......... ..·.. 85-90

I.izard district, Cornwall; England.. . , ..... 240

·Logan, Sir W. E. ; geological map of Canada

. cited ... .. ... .. ~ .......... 181, 188, 189, 226

, Mu~ray and........................ 187

462

· INDEX ~

Page. Loop, The; in wa;ve action ... ~ ..•...•...... 91,96 Los Angeles County, California; artesian
wells.......... .. ......................... 151 Loss of flow in wells (see Decline of flow} .157-165 Loughridge, Dr. R. H . . . . . . .. . . .. .. . . . . . . . . 40 Loxalophodon. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 L Luc,J. A. de . ...... ... .................... 21!J Luidius (see Lhwyd.) Luther, Martin, the first to assign the flood
as the cause of petrifactions.......... . . . . 391 Lycopodiacere... .. . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . .. 446 L ycopodinere ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 433 L ycopodinere, Development of the : ....... . 446 Lycopodiolithes . ........ . ................ .427, 428 Lycopodites ... . .. . ..•........ .. . ... .. . ... . . . 428 Lycopodium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438 Lyell glacier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322
red snow............ ... ...... 323 , Mount .............................314,315 , Sir Charles.. . . ............. . ........ 379
McGee, W J .............. .XVIII, XXIII, XXVIII, 417 , Administ·ative report ....... 34-41
McKays Mountain, L ake Superior . . . . . . . . . 203 McKinney, R. C ..................... ..... . McLaughlan,Maj. J....... ..... .... . ...... 23 McLennan's Landing .. . . .. .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 225 Macomb's Expedition ............... --..... 383 Madison, Wis........... ........... ........ 223 Mahtowah, Minn . .. . .. .. . . .. .. .. . . . . .. .. .. 233 Major, Johann Daniel, first to mention true
leaf impressions in rock . ....... :.... 389, 425 , Rational views of .. 389, 393 Mammals, Gigantic Dinocerata . . . . . . . . . . . . 243 Mankato, Minn............................ 202 Mantell, G. A.; "Fossils of the South Downs " .................. .... . ......... . .405 Manuscript geologic map United States.... 35 maps used in forming United States geological ma;p. . . . . . . . 38 Maps, Canadian ... .................... :. .. . used in forming United States geological map.................. . ....... 37 Marathon County, Wisconsin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194 Marcou,J.B .·.......................... ~ ··· 50 ,Prof. J ............................ 54,378 Mare's tail (llippuris), supposed fossil ...... 396 Marion, Prof. .A..F ...............·........... 384 Marek, W. von de.......................... 424 Marquette and Menominee iron-bearing series ........................ 189-194 County, Michigan............... 235 Region .... 183, 187, 189, 190, 192, 193, 195,
196, 198, 203, 204, 207, 210, 211, 212,213,214,216,217,218,224,
225, 228, 229, 230, 231, 235 Marsh, Prof. 0. C...................... xxv, 11,12
. ; administrative report.. .49-50 ; gigantic dinocerata.. .243-302
Marshall Hill, Wis .. " .. .. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . 228 Marsh Valley, Idaho, landslips in . . . . . . . . . . 120 Marsilia.... ; ...... ; ............... . ... 432, 438,446
Bendirei...................... ...... 446 Martin, William; "Petrificata Derbiensia" 402

Page.

Martins, C. ·F., Contributions of, to paleo-

botany .................. 405, 428

; classification of fossil plants . . . . 428

Maryland, work in........................

8·

Massalongo, Abrams, Contributions of. to

paleolJOtany....... 423

, Rank of, as a paleobotanist .. 368, 369

Sketch of..... . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . 379

Mattlliolus on petrified wood . . ....... 388, 390, 391

Measurement of flow in artesian wells . . . . . 159

Mednllosre .......... ...... ...... ....... .... 446

M eehan, Thomas; cited on·Alaskan glaciers 353

Melville, Dr. \V. H .......................xxv,48

Menominee, Marquette and, iron-bearing

region ................. 189-194, 234

River......................... 190

rocks ... 183, 187, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196,

203, 204, 207, 210, 211, 218, 228

Merced River........... .. ................. 315

Merret, Christop her, Rational views of, on

the nature of fossils. .. . .. . .. . .. .. . . . . . . .. 394

Merriam, '\¥. N ...... . ...... 24, 25, 27, 28, 188, 197,

201, 202, 203, 205

Mesabi Ran ge ......... , ........... 197, 204, 205, 206

Metamorphism in the Huronian..... . . . . . . . 241

Mica schists studied microscopically.. .. ... 212

Microscopic studies .... . ................. 209- 242

Michigamme Lake ......... ........ .. -.· ... 213, 230

mine.......................... 233

Mille Lacs County, Minnesota . . . . . . . . . • . . . 200

Lake........... .. . ... ........ 197

Miller, Hugh.................. .... ........ 393

Mineral production of the United States....xxvrr

Mining districts, Survey of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIV

statistics and technology, Division

of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63, 64

Minnesota Ri.ver ... . .. . . .. . . . . . . .... . . . . . .. 200

VaHey ........................ 201, 202

Miohippus seried. .. . ....................... 254

Miquel, F. A; G.; monograph of the Cyca,

dacero . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415

Mississaugi lUver ....................... 188, 197

Mississippil{iver ................. 187, 197, 205, 210

Missouri Rh·er modified by a.rtesian wells.. 150

Mitchell, Dakota................ .. .. . .. .. . 280

, Prof. Henry, cited on tide-lands... 77

Modified system of botanical classification

proposed . : ............................. .436-437

Moering, Paul Gerard, on the indigenous

theory offo.ssil plants .. .. .. .. .. .......... 396

Mono Basin... . ... ... ......... .... .. . . . .... 328

L ake glacier ........................ 314, 315

Monochlamydere............. .. .. .. . .. . . .. 433

Monocotyledons . .. . . . .. . .. .. . .. . .. . .. .... 429, 433

, Development of the . . . . . . 448

Monopeta,]re .. . ...... ... ......... . . '...... .. 433 Montana Division, The .................... ~ 9

Montaniri first announced potency of cur-

rents with ·waves .............. --·--:....... 88

Montreal River............................. 195

Moody County, Dakota .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . .. .. .. 200

Moose Lake, Wisconsin........... .. .. .. . .. 213

Moraines .......................... 120, 121,312,321

Morand, J. F. C., Rational views of, on the

nature of fossils . ......................... 394

INDEX.

463

Page.
Moriere, J' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . 245

Moni , John; catalogue of Hritish fossils .. 415

.Moni on County, Minne ota .... ._. ..... . .200, 208

Mo nlu , Ludovicu , Rational views of, on

the nature of fo sils .................... , . 393 Mougeot, A .. .. . .. ... . . . ....•..••...•..... .375, 415

Mountain Lake graywacka . . .... .• . •. . . . . . . M ountBakerglaciers · ·-········ ·· ······-- ~ -
Conness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ••. . . .

233
341 315

Dana ...... . ....................... 314-317 glacier . . . . . . . . . . •• . . . . . . . . . . . . 315

Hood glacier.. ..................... 339-340

Mount Humphrey . . . . . . . . . . . ... . •. . . . . . ... 314

J ffi r on gla ier . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . 3-U

King ... .... ············ .••••. •..... 314 Lincoln . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342 !,yell ........ .. ...... ..... ......... 314, 315
gll\-cier...... :!16-317, 318, 319, 320, 324

McClure . . . . . . . . . ........•.....•. 315, 316

glacier ... ... .. ...... . ..... 322, 324 rate of flow . . . . . . . . . 322
Moran p;laciers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 346

Rainier glacier •••.......... .....• . 334, 335

Ritter ................. .. .. ... . .... 314, 315

glacier .. .................... 325, 326

Shasta glacier ...... .. . ............ 329-334
red snow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323 St. Elias glaciers . .................. 348, 353 Tachoma. (See Rainier.) Whitney . .-..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314

Whittlesey quartzite.. . . . ...... .... 232 Muir, John, on California glaciers ..... 324, 325,326
rate of flow of Mount McClure glacier . . . . . . . . . . . . 322

Miinster, Count of; " B eit1 age zur Petrefactenkunde" ...............................
~1u1lin, A. E..... . .......................... Murray, A., cited on Huronian............. Murray and Logan................... . ..... Murrish, J . .. . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . ..... . . . . . . . . . .

412 57
188 187 220

Mylius, G. F., on the diluvian origin of fos·

s il remains . . ·........ . ................... 392,398

Myrrh; supposed fossiL................... 396

Nathorst, G. ; investigations into the fossil flora of Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 424
Natural method in botanical classification.. 431
Nature-printing, Invention of.............. 380
N aturselbst<lruck, Invention of . . . . . . . . . . . . 380
Nau, B.S. von, Contributions of, to paleobotany .... .. ...... ... . .... ...... .. .. .... . 404
Naumann, C. F............... . ...... . ... .. 219 N eebish Island, Saint Mary's River, quartz- -
ite . ..................... .• . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Neptunian theory of W crner. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398 N er>ation of leaves, Study of ... .380, 412,419,420 Ner>es, The cranial ......... ....... . ... .... 285 N eve defined ........................ ..·..... 318 Newberry, Dr. J. S .... ..................... 54, 369
; observed glaciers in Oregon . . . . 341 , Paleobotanical investigations of 424 , Sketch of. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 381 New England Division, The........... . .... 3, 4
Lisbon, Wis.; Potsdam sandstone .220, 223·, 235 Ulm, Minn . . .. . .................... ~. 2il0, 202 Newman, W. G............................. 6

Page. Nicollet County, Minnesota ...•.•.. 202, 223,233, 235 Nilsson, S>eno, on the fossil plants of
Sweden ................................. 403, 405
Nipigon Bay, Lake Superior; sandstone.... 23! Nisqually Ri>er runs from a glacier........ 335
glacier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336 Noachian deluge, Fossils supposed to bethe
remains left by the ... .390, 398 , Phillips on the effect of
t.he. .. ...... ............ 408 Noerr, A... . .. . . .... . ...................... 13 ~one uch belt ............................ _ 22!:! N orite defined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •. . . . . . . . . . . . . 215 Nor-th Atlantic district ... .. ............... XYlii
Lake.................. ...... ........ 20! reggerath, J acob, on the mode of growth of oal plants........... . . ..... ...... .... 400 Kreggerathia . ........................ .428, 430,447 Nomenclature and classification of fossil plauts. ...... ..................... .. . . .. .425-431 Numakngon, Lake .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . 194 Number of species of fossil plants, Evidence
furnished by the .. .............. 439
reportedatdifferentdates ... 407,416,417,
421, 422, 424, 428

Oak openings . . . . . . . •. ••• . . •. •. . ••. . . . . . . •. 100 Ogishkiemuncie L ake...................... 207 Oken, I .., on p et-rified wood........... . ..... 402 Oldhamia -.. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 444 Old River Bed, Utah....................... 96
Olivine-diabase defined......... . . . . . . . . . . . . 215 Olivi11e-gabbro defined...... . ... . . ......... 215 Ontonagon River sandstone. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
Oquirrh Range, Utah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Orbit of particle in wave motion . . . . . . . . . . 82 Oreodon beds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254 Oreoc:yon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 255 Orlebar glacier, Alaska ..........-.......... 352 Orohippus . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255
Orthoclase-diabase defined . . . . . .•. . . . . . . . .. 21.5
Orthoclase-gabbro defined.................. 215 Osar or Kame, The......................... 121 Osmunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428
; supposed fossil. ................ 396, 402 Owen, D. D.... . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
; a source of compilation ... ·..... 183 Owen's Lake ..... ,......................... 314
River.............................. 315 "

Pacific, Division of the, administrative report of _............... ....._. .... . ....... 47-49
Packwaukee,Wis., Potsdam sandstone..... 224 Palresyops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255

Paleobotanical. discovery; Historical review

of....................... .. .............. . Paleobotany, Compendium of ..... . . . ~.....
, Future prospects of..........
hitherto studied as distinct

368
363 365

from botany proper. . . . . . . . . . 367 , Interdependence of botany and 366

, List of the principal culti·

vators of.............. . ..... 369

, Need of a condensed exhibit

of.................. . ... .. ... 364

, On the term .•.••.... . .•....• ; 363

J

464-

INDEX.

IPaleob

o

tany,

P

ioneers

i

n...

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.........P

age. 401

Pa~.te.
Pilularia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . • . . . . • . • • . 446

, Sketch of, by L. F . Ward ... .357-452 Pinitessuccinifer (amber-tree)........... .. 418

, The pre-scientific period of. . . 385 Pinus regarded by Dr. John as the amber-

~cieutific period of....... 399

tr

403

Paleontologic work ...... . .... .. ... ......... xxv PioneetB in pa.1eobotany... .......... . .• •. . . 401

Paleontology, Divi ion of; admini trative

Pipe tone or Callinit .. . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . 20*

report . ....... . . .. ... . . . .. .. 49-50 Plagiocla e-angite rock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 215

, Origin of the science of . . . . . . 398

-diallage rock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215

, True scope of the term.... . . . 363

·hy persthene rock . .. . . •. ... . . . 215

Palreospathe Sternbergii ... ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 448 Plant life of the globe, Different point of

Paleozoology, Need of the term . . . . . . . . • . . . 363

vi w from which

Palladreau !~;lands ..................... ~.. . 231

to contempl te

Palmacites. . . . . .. ..........·.. . . . . . . .. . . . . . 427

the ........... 442, 443

Palwcr mine, Micbigan. ................... . 232

, Geognostico-botan·

rapers accompanying annual report of the

ical view of the. . 43!1

Director . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . 67

, Tabular exhibit of the .. . . .... 440, 441

Parker Creek glacier ......... 315, 317,319, 320,322 Plants, Descent of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 52

Canon . .. . ...... .. .......... 317, 328

, Geological periods favorable, or the

Parkinson, James·; classification of fossil

r e>erse, to the preservation of. . .450, 451

plants........... . . . 426 Pliny on fossils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 386

"Organic remains of a

Plot, Robert, on the nature of fossils , . . . . . . -390

former world,"..... 401 Plutonian theory of Hutton. . ....... . ..... . 398

P arlatore, Filippo, Contributions of, topaleo-

Poacit ......•....... . ............. . .... .427, 428

botany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415 P k • rna Fall ...............•.......187, 205,206

Parsons, James, on the petrified fruits of

Pokorn , .................. .. . ...... ..... a 1

Sheppey ....... . ...... .397, 413 Polley!<, T. A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . 2

, Rational views of, on the

Polypetalre . .... . .. ... ............... .... .. 433, 450

nat ure of fossils . . . . . . . . 394 Polypodium, Supposed fossil . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . 402

Pattison, S. R; on Fossil Botany .. .. .·.. . . .. 422 Pomel, M. .A., on the .Jurassic fiora of France . 420

:Peale, Dr. A . C .... .- ... . .. ... . .... XX, XXI, 16,28-30 Populus nigra ; supposed fossil. ..........• - . 396

Pearson, ]'rank ·M . ~......... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 Porcupine Mountains .. . ...... .. ....... 22R, 234 ·

Pelican Lake . ......... , . .. .. -~ .......... . : . 194 Porous u eds for artesian wells . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136

River..... . ... ..................... 194 Porphyries, Fe! itic, studied microscopic-

Pelvis of Dinocer ata, The..... . ............ 300 ally ... .. . ·· · ·· ····· · ··········· . ..... . .. . 214 Penokee belt ..... .. .. . ..... . 193,195,198,204,207, · Port Arthur, Lake Superior ·.. .. .. ... ..... 203, ~04

212, 213, 215, 218, Portage Bay Islaud, Minnesota . . ... ..... . 224, 233

227, 228, 22!!, 230 Post-lacustrine deformation............. ... 123

Gap, Wisconsin .. . .. ... .... 222, 223, 232 Potsdam sandstone, 182, 194, 196, 199, 201, 202, 220,

GogeLic ........... .. 187, 192, 193, 198,203

223, 226, 229, 234, 236, 237

iron belt, The ... ....... .. 194-196 Powell, Lieut. J . W., British Columbia... .. 352

Peridotites..................... .. .... ...... 217 · · Maj. J. W., 9ited. .• . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150

Petrifaction, E arly theories of the cause

; thickness of strata· in

of .... ................. . ........ ... ... . .389, 390

the several forma·

"Petrifying juice.. . .................. . . . . . . 390

tions ......... . . _. . . 442

"Petrographical studies ..... : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209

, suggested diastrophic. 118

Petzholdt, .Alexander, Contributions of, to

Prairie River Falls, Minn . . ....... 205, 225, 226, 233

paleobotany . ...... : ... ; .... . ........... . 414,416 Pre-scientific period of paleobotany . .1..... 385

J>h renogams ....... , , ......... . .. . .. : . . . . . . . 433 ·Presqu' Isle .............. . ... . ............ 217, ,218

Phar; erogams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429 . Princeton College has Wyoming fossils ... . 252

Phillips, J . .A. . . .......•••••... ...•. ..••••• . 221 , 2H Pritchett, Prof. H. S . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

"Geology of Yorkshire".... 408 Problems in correlation of N . W . .Archrean. 185

, on the geological effects of

Prognostic estimat e of flow in wells .. .... .. 159

thedeluge . . .. ..... . .. .... 408 Progressive de>elopment in plant life, Lind-

"Photographic work......................... xxxv ley and Hut·on's opposition to the doc·

Phyllites............ . ...... . .. . ... .. ....... 428 trine of.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409

, Objections to the .term . ......... 413 Prm;ser, C. S.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

:Physiotypy, Invention of. . .......... . ...... 380 Protosalvinia . . . . . . .. . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 446

Phytobiblia . ..... .. :. . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . •. . . . . 426 Psarolithes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402

Phytogeny, Problems of... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 452 Pteris, supposed fossil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . 402

:Phytogeography, Recent progress in . . . . . . . 366 Pterophyllum....... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 447 Phytolithi. ... , ... . .......... . ..... . .. ...... 426 Publications of the Survey . . ... - ~ ····.·. . ... XXXI

Phytopaleontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •• • • • • 363

Sale of .. . ...... XXXIII

Phytotypolithi . ........ . ..... . .......... .. 426, 427

Exchange of. . .. XXXIV

:Pigeon Point, Lake Superior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 Pumpelly and Brook.............. . ...... . 19.5

River, Minnesota, gra_ywacke. ...... 234

Prof. R ...............• ..: .•..•.. 214, 215

INDEX.

465

Page. Pumpeliy, Prof. R., discovered glaciers on
Flathead Mountains . . •• • •• . . •. . . . . . . . . . . 347 Puyallup River runs from a glacier . . . . . . . 335

Quartz fragments, Enlargements of........ 218 Quartzite series, Baraboo, The ........... 198, 199
of Southern Minnesota and Southeastern Dakota, The . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
Quartzites and sandstones studied microscopically...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
, Huronia_n , Genesis of. .. . . . . . . . . 236 of Chippewa and Barron Counties, Wisconsm... ... . . . .. . . . 197 of Upper Wisconsin Valley .. . . 194
Quaternary................................ 200 geology, Division of; adminis. trative report ...... .......... 20-24
lakes of Great Basin studied by G. K. Gilbert. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXII
Quillworts ._... .... .. . .. . . . . . . . . ... . . . ... . . . 438 Quinnesec :Falls, Big and Little . . . . . . . . . . . . 190

Rainfall............ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147

, .Adequacy of, measured by capac-

ity of strata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151

Rankine, W ..J. M., on wave motion....... . 80

Rash Creek Canon moraine...... ..... . . . . . . 328

Raulin, Victor, Paleobotanical contributions

of.......... ..... ................ ........ 421

Raumer, Carl von, on vegetable fossils...... 403

Recognition of ancient shores, The . . . . . . . . 122

Rectification of shores . . ~. . . . •• • •. . . . . . . . . . . 103

Red River Valley .........................199, 200

snow, Mount Shasta................... 323

Redstone, Minnesota ..••.............• 200, 223,224

Redwood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 448

Reed, W. M ................................ 11, 12

Reid, Thorburn. . . . .. .. .. . . . • • •• .. . . .. . . .. .. 14

Renault, B., Investigations into the car·

boniferous flora of France...... . . . . . . .. . . 424

Renshawe_, J. H . ... ... ..................... XIX, 9
t w. s.......... ·· ···•••••••·--••• 9,14-

Report oftl).e Director .. .............XVII-xxxvr

Reservoir or fountain head, The . . . . . . . . . . . 144

Restoration of Dinocerata skeletons . . . . . . . 302

Reutilization of water in irrigation..... . ... 150

Rhabdocarpus.... . ... .... .. ...... . ... ...... 447

Rhin, Lucas, on the nature of fossils... . . . . . 390

Rhizocarpere .......................... 432, 438, 446

Rhizolithus . • •. . . . . . •. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426

Rhode's" Pflanzenkunde der Vorwelt " . . . 404

Ribboned structure of glaciers .•. . . . . .. . . . 318

Ribs of Din operata................ ... . .. . . 298

Ricksecker, E. .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Ridges of diverse origin contrasted .......120, 121

Ritter, Mount ...... _................... .. 314, 315

glacier .._.. . . .. .. . . . ....... 325, 326

River terraces .... . ...................... 116-118

Roche-a-Crier, Wisconsin.................. 223

Rocky Mountain District.. .. .. . ..... .. ..... xvm

, Glaciers of . . . . . . 344

Roemer, Friedrich Adolph, Contributionl!

of, to paleobotany...... . .. . . . . .. . . .. .. . 415

Rogers, H. D . .. . . .. .. .. . . .

377

1
Page. Rominger, C ..............................191, 218
, Map of Michigan . .............. 181 Rosinus, Michael Reinhold, on extinct spe-
cies . . . . . . . . ....... . .. .. . . . . . . .. 398 , Rational views of, on the nature of
fossils . ................... .. .... 394Rossmassler, E. A., Contributions of, to' pa-
le ~botany . . . . . • . .. .. . •. . . .. . . . . . .. .. . . . . . 413 Rove Lake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 Ronillier, C., Paleobotanical contributions
of ......... . .................._........... . 420 Rubber packing to control flow in artesian
wells ... . ..........._. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158 Rum River................................. 197 Russell, I. C ......... . ... XIX, XXII, 30, 31, 32, 33, 3<l
, cited as to shore phenomena.. 71l , on existing glaciers of the
United States -......... ... 303-355 Russell, Scott, cited on wave motion . . . . . . . 80 Rutley, F............ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214 Rhythmic embankments.............. .. ... 111

Saganaga, Lake .. . .. . . ..... 203, 204,205,207,215

Sagenaria . .. .. . . . .. .. . . . . .. . . .. . . .. . .. . . . . . 428

Sachs, J _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 436

Saginaw mine, Michigan. .. .. . .. . . .. .. . . .. 232

Sago palm. . .. . . . . .. ... :.. . .. . . .. .. .. . . . . . . 433

St. Gothard Pass gneisses...... .. . ... . . . .. 241

Saint Joseph's lsland, Lake Huron . . . . .. . 231

Saint Louis River rocks ........ 187, 197,210, ~28

Saint Mary's River rocks_ ....... 187, 188, 189, 223,

- 224, 227, 231

Saint Peter's sandstone ... .. ....• 182, 220, 223,224,

235, 236, 237

Salisbury, Miss C. A., cited as to artesian

wells at Denver. . . . .. .. .. . . . . . 151

, Prof. R. D ....... _... ........ XXI, 20, 21

~alvinia .............. . ............... 432, 438, 446

San Bernardino County, California, arte-

sian wells........... ................. . ... 151

San Joaquin River......................... 315

Sandalites........... ........ ... .. ... . ... . .. 426

Sandstone from Adams Connty,W~s<!onsin. 235-

.Ashland County, Wis . . . . . 235-

Baraboo River . . . . . . . . . . . . 235

Black :eay, Lake Superior. 234

Columbia County, Wis.... 235

Dane County, Wisconsin .. 235

Devil's Lake........ .... .. 233

Eureka, N ev . .. .. . .. .. .. .. 235-

Grant County, Wisconsin. 235

Henry Mountains, Utah... 235

Jackson County, Wis.

235

Keweenaw Point, Mich .. 234, 235

Marquette County, Uich .. 235

Mount Whittlesey........ 232

New Lisbon, Wis .. .. .. . 235

Nicollet County, M inn 233, 235

Nipigon Bay, Lake Supe·

rior ......... , ..... _. . . . . 334

OntonagonRiver . ......... 235

Porcupine Mountains

234

Presqu' Isle River........ 234

Saint Mary's River ...... _. 231

Silver Islet Landing, L. S.. 23t

466 INDEX.

Page.

Sandstone from Spurr mine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232

Sandstones, Quartzites and, microscopically studied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209

with crystal-faceted grainR-

Huronian localities... . . . . . 233

Potsdam localities. . . . . . . . . 223

St. Peter's localities....... 233 Sandy River glacier... . ............·....... . 340

Saporta, Marquis Gaston de, Paleobontanical studies of, in France . . . . . . . 424
, Rank of, as a paleobotanist ...... 368, 369

, Sketch of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383

Sarayna, Torellus; Rational views of, on the

nature of fossils ....... . .. ..... : ........ . 393, 399

Sauk County, Wisconsin, rock ........223, 226, 233 SaukValley .....••••................ . .. 213,214

SaultSte. Marie .._.•.........•••.......... 188

Saussure ......... . .. .. ..... .... :. . . . . . . . . . . 219

Sauvages, L'.A:bbe de, on the tropical facies of fossil plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397
Sauveur, J., on the fossil plants of Belgium 421 Sayles, Ira . . ... ...... . ... ._............ XXVI, 52, 53

Saxifraga, supposed fossil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396 Scarabelli, G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 379

Schenk, August.................. . ...... . .. 369

,Sketchof... . .......... .. ~ 382

, Paleobotanical work of.. . 424

8cheuchzer, Johann .Jacob .. ...... . .. 369,396,426

, Attempt of, to refer fossil to liv-

ing plants ............... 396, 403, 425

; dilu vian origin of fossils . . . . . . 391

,Sketch of.. : .. . ................ 370 Schimper, Wilhelm Philip ........•••.. 369, 403; 431

, Contributions of, to paleobotany .414, 415

, Sketch of.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375 Schists, fet:,ruginous of the Black River Val-

ley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198

of the Upper Wisconsin Valley . . . 19-! Schlotheim, Ernst :Friedrich, Baron von . .. .369, 405

, Advanced views of............. 400 , Classification of fossil plants

by . ---.--.--.- .- .---.-- ---.- .403,427 , Early contributions of, to paleo-

botany ....... .. .400, 401, 402, 404, 405

, Sketch of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . 370 Schmeltzkopf, E............................ 11

Schroter, Johann .Samuel, on the diluvian

origin of fossil remains ............. : . . . . 392

Schultze, Ch. Fr., indigenous theory of fossil plants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396

, Rational views of, on the nature of

of fossils. . . • . . . . . • . . . . . . . ••• • . . 394

, T1 eatment of plant impressions by Schwatka, Lieut. F., on glaciers of Alaska.. Schweigger, A . F., on vegetable fo.ssils . . . . .

426 353 403

Scientific peliod of paleobotany............ 399 Scilla, Augustinns, rational views of, on the

nature of fossils . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . • . . .. . . .. 393

Scouring rushes . . . . . ....... . ............... 433 Scratched stones............................ 322

Sea cliffs, Origin of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83, 84 Section to illustrate vertebrate life in Amer-
ica . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . 253

Seed-bag for artesian well!! .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158 Seed-theory of the origin of fossils ....... ..389, 390 Selaginella . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . • · 438

Page.

Selaginella arctica .................... , . . . . . .446

Selden, H. S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •. •. . . . . . . . 4

Selwyn, Dr. A. R. C.................... . .... 38

Seminaria of Kircher .... :. ................. 390

Seneca Lake deltas......................... 108

Sequoia .... . . ............. ................ . 448

gigantea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . 448

semperv irens .. .................... 448

Se~pPnt Riwr· Bay. ..... ............. . .... . 188

Shaler, Prof., N. S. . .... . .... . ............. 54, 236

Shasta, Mount., Glaciers . .. .. . . . ... . . . .... .329-334

Sbastina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 329

Shaw, Edmund ............................. 11,14

Sheep Rock, Great Salt Lake......... .. . . . . 84
4;Shepard. R. D .......... ...• : . •. . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

Sherburne County, ·Minnesota....... . . . . . . . 200

Shore current . ......... ; . . ......... .... . ...85,111

drift . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . 86, 87, 90, 9R

featurrs, Discrimination of . ........ .. 112

, Origin of the distribution of

wave-wrought........... 101

Shores, The recognition of ancient. ~ . .

122

Shore-wall . ..... ,. .................... .••. 109

Shumway, W.A-...................... . .... 6,7

~butt, G. W., Administrative report ........ 64.:..66

Sidener, C. F.................. ...... .. . . . 26

Sierra Blanca glacier...................... . 344

Nevada, .glaciers of. .... . ... 314, 327, 329-334

Sigillaria ... .. .. . ..................... . ... 428, 430
Silmian, Flora of the .. ............ .... . . . .444, 44 >

Silver J slet Landing, L. S., sandstone . . . . . . 234

Simpson, Capt. J. H., Explorations of, in

Grr at Basin...... . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . • . 342

Sioux Falls, Dak .......,.. ...... .... .. . . . .. . 201

Sketch of paleobotany, L. F. Ward...... 357-452

the earl y bistor,y and subsequent

progress of p aleobotany . . . . . . . 385

Skull. (See Dinoceras mirabile.)

Slate belt of the Saint Louis and Missouri

Rivers, Minnesota .......... .......... .·... 196

Sleeping Bear Bluff, Lake Michigan . . .. .. . .93, lOR

Smith, Dr. James Edward, on the exotic

character of fossil plants , .. . ·. . . . . 402

, J. Lawrence. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . 60

, William,.on the determination of the

age of rocks by their fossils..... . 3D8

Sonora Pass . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314

Sorbns, supposed fossil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396

Sorby, H. C .. ..... ... ..... 218, 220, 221, 222, 223, 241

South Atlantic District .............. . ..... xvm

Special study of artesian wells to be stimu-

lated .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .

173

Sperling, J. , Theory of the origin of fossils . 390

Sphrerococcites Scharyanus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 444

Sphenophyllum primrevum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 445

Sphenopteris ... ......... . ... ·__ , .... .. . .. . . . 428

Spirangium ...... . ........... ... ........... · 448

Spiritus architectonicus ................ , . 390

Spit, The, formed by wave action ...... . .... 91-92

SplitRockCreek .... .. ................... 200

Spontaneous generation, Doctrine of . . . . . . . 389

Sprengel, .Anton, on psarolithes...... .. . .. . 408

'c-- --. .... . .. ........ . ........... 393

Spurr mine sandstone .. .......... .... ..... . 232

Mountain, Michigan .....• .. ........ 222, 223

Stearns Count.v, Minnesota.•.•.•.... ... .. . 200, 208

INDEX.

467

Page. Steffens, Heinrich, on petrified wood....... 402
, on the mode of growth of coal plants .... .. .. . . ...... .. . . . . . . . 400
Steinhauer, Rev. Henry, Rem<-rkable paper of ·'On Fossil Re!iqnire," etc. 403
; Classification of fossil plants by. 426· Steininger, J., on the "Pfalzisch-saar-br-iic-
kische Steinkohlengebirge" . .. . . . . . . . . . . 413 Stelechites ............. ~ .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426 Steno, Nicholaus, Rational views of, on the
nature of fossils...... .. . . . . .. . . . . . . .. .. .. 394 Sternberg, Kaspar Maria, Graf von........ 369
, qassification of fossil plants. . . . 428 , Early contributions of . . . .402, 404, 405 ; geological periods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428 , on the roode of ,growth of, coal
plants......................... 400 , Sketch of ...........·. .. .. . . . .. .. 371 Sternbergia ... .. . . .. . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . 447
, Dawson's views on ...........377, 379 Sternum, Dinocerate .. .. . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . .. . 291:l Stevens, General Hazard, gives account of
Mount Tachoma glacier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339 Stigmaria ................................ .428, 430 Stikine River, glaciers of ...... . .......... 349, 352 Stockton, R., on map of Bonneville Lake .. . 95 Stone-making spirit as the cause of fossil!!.. 390 Strabo on the meaning of fossil shells .... 386, 387 Stream cliff, The .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. .. .. 113
work, The Delta......... . ....... 104, 108 St-reng, A ..................... 197, 213,214,215,216 Strong, M.; map of Wisconsin.............. 181 Structural problems inN. W. Arcl1rean . . . . 183 Stylinodon .......... ................ .. ..... 255 Submergence, emergence, and, of shores.... 110 Succus Petrificus .......'...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . 390 Suckow, George Adolph, Rational vil'WS of.
on fossil plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ......... 395, 398 Superior, Lake, bars at bead of............. 94 Supplemental reservoirs, artesian wells . . . . 149 Survey of the Cascade Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiii
District of Columbia . . . . . . . . xxiii S_yringodendron .. . .. . .. . .. .. .. . .. .. . .. . .. . 428 Systeni of modern botanists................ 435
Tabular exhibit of the plant life of the globe..................... : ..............440-441
'Tachoma (see Rainier). Tahoe Lake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . .••. • 314 Tallmadge, Theodore . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. . 6 Tchihatcheff, P. de......................... 416 Teal Lake, Michigan, quartzite............. 232 Tehichipi Pass .. .. .. . .. . . .. . .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. . 314 Temperature of artesian·well water... . . . . . 166 Tenzel, W. E., Rational views of, on the na-
ture of fossils .. ... . .. .. .. . .. .. .. ... ... .. . 394 Terminology of fossil plants. (See Nomen-
clature, etc.) 'Terrace by differential degradation, The.... 116
, The stream ...................... 116-118 fault......................... 118 landslip .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. 118 wave built . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 cut .................... 84,85
'Terraces of diverse origin.................. 115

Page. Tertiary flora of Australia, Important bear-
ing of the, on the distribution of plants . . . . . . . . 366 Western America........ 252 Tertullian on the significance of fossil shells ................................... 386, 398 •.rests of flow in artesian wells . . . . . . . . . . . . 160 Teton Mountain glaciers ......... ... .... .·.. 346 Theophrastus .. ·. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387 Thesaurus ofAmerican formations .... .XXVIII, 39 Tbessalon Bay, Lake Superior.... . . . . . . . . . . 230 Point .. .... . :.................... 188 Thickness of strata in the successive geo· logical formations. . . . . . . . . • . . ••. . . . . . . . . . 442 Thompson, .Minn.... .. .. .. .. . ... .. .... . .. 196 , Gilbert......... . ......... XIX, 13,42 ; Mount Shasta glacier.332-334 , Prof. A.. H ..... .......... XIX, 10, 11, 12 Three Sisters (peaks) glaciers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341 Thunder Bay, Lake Superior...... 182, 187, 204, 205
206, 227, 228 Cape, Lake Superior.. . . . . . . . . . . . . 203 Thygeson, N. M .. . .. . .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. • .. .. . . 28 Tides distinguish sea-shores from lakeshores.......... . . .. .. . . .. ....... 77-86 overrated as shore-forming agents . . 79 Tillodonts first found in Wyoming... . . . . . 250 Tillotherium .. . .. .. .. . . . .. . .. . •.. .. .. .. . .. • 255 Time, Effect of, on flow of artesian wells . . . 163 measures employed in the diagrams . . 442 Tinoceras. anceps .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 249
grande.......................... 251 lucare .... .. . . . . ........ . . ... . . . . 251 Todd County, Minnesota................. . 208 , Prof. J. E ........................ XXI, 21,22 Topographic features of lake shores, The . . 69
work .................. ....... xvn Tornebohn, A. E .. .. . .. .. . .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 214 Toroweap Valley, Grand Canon of the Colo-
rado . . . . . ... .. ....... .. . . . ... ... . . . . .. . .. 113 Torpedoes used to increase water-flow...... 154. Tournefort's system, Scbeuchzer's attempt
to classify fossil plants under ....... 896, 425, 426 Towson, R. M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . 5, 14 Transportation, Littoral ................... 85-90 Trenton limestone...... . . . •. . . . . . . . . . . . ••. . 182 Tl'ifolium, Supposed fossil.................. --'3'96 Trigonocarpus ••.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. 447 Trinidarl, Sandstone from . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 219 Tuolumne Canon . ...... . ................. .316, 317
glacier ...... . ... ~ ............... 325, 327 River ...................... 315, 310,322 •.rurner, W. H .. .. .. .. .. .. . • • . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . 48 Tyler's Fork, Quartzite from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2il2 Types of vegetation......................... 432 Tyndall, John ; an authority on glaciers. 309,310,320
Unalaska, Glaciers in............. .......... 353 Unger, Fram>:, Classification of fossil plants. 422
, Contributions of, to paleobotany .. 414, 415, 417, 419; 420, 422
, Rank of, as a paleobotanist .. ...... 3G8, 369 , Sketch of.. ,.... ..................... 375 Ungulata ...... . ..................... .·..... 255 Uinta group................................ 252

468

INDEX.

Page.

Page.

Uinta Mountains . . ..........•• ... ... ....... 249 Wasatch Mountains........................ 249

Uintatherium . .. . . . . ...... .. ..••.•...... .. 251

; fault scarp atFarming-

Undertow at head of bay... . ........... ..... 98

ton, Utah............ 114

, Detritus sort-ed by .............. 86-98 Water, Character of, in artesian wells...... 166

, Function of .. . . .••........... ... 81, 82 Wausau ..................................194, 214

Union Peak, Nevada....................... 342 •Wauswaugoning Bay, Lake Superior .. . . . . 233

Upham, Warren, Minnesota Geological sur-

Wave-built terrace, The................... 97

vey .. ~ - ......... .... .. .......•... . ...... .183, 197

-cut terrace, The . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84, 85

Upheaval causes irregulari~ of erosion .. . . 75

motion, Theory of . .... .. ............ 80, 82

Uralitic diabase defined................ .. .. 215

-work ou shores ....... . .........'... 80, 100

gabbro defined . .................... 215

-wrought shore features, Distribution

of . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

VanHise, Prof. C. K ... ~. 24, 25, 27, 28, 188, 194,196, Wedel, G. W., Rational views of, on the na-

197, 202, 209, 213, 214, 215, 216, 237-240 ture of fossils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394

Hoesen, Henry I. ... ...... -- . . . . . . . . . . . 34 Weed, Walter H ............. .. ....... . .. . . 15,18

Vancouver cited on Alaskan glaciers . . . . . . 349 Wells. (See Artesian.)

Vanuxem's Geology of New York . . . . . . . . . 415 W eppcn, J. A., -on petrified wood from India

Variolaria...... ... . . . . . . . . .•. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . 428 and Sibrria .............. .-. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402

Varnum, R. T ............................. . 13,14 Werner, W. G.; Neptunian theory......... 3!J8

Vascular cryptogatns . ... . . . .. . . . ... . . . . . . . 432 Westfield, Wis .•. .. .".... .. ...... ......... 225

V-bar11 . ....... .. .... ...... ...... ..... . .... . 99 Wheeler, Lienr. G. M........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342

-terraces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 Wheeler's Peak.... . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . 342

Vegetable paleontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363 White, Dr. C. A ... . ............ ~ ......... XXV, 48

Vermilion Creek deposit.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252

; administrative report .... 50, 51

Lake . ............. 193, 197, 205, 208, 210

, cited on artesian wells .. . 149

River . ........ . .... . .. . . . . ..... 206

, explained shore wall . . . . 109

V ertebrre of dinocerata, The .......... ·.... 294-298

; map of Iowa . .. . ......... 181

Vertebrate life in America, Section to illus-

, Rev. A. F ..... . ·.· .. . ............... 342

trate......... 253

River glacier .............. 336, 337,338,339

paleontology...... . . . . . . . . • • • •• 363

runs from a glacier .......... 335, 337

Virt-us formativa .... . .. •. . ..•... . .......... 389 Whitne_y glacier. ............. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334

Vis lapidifica, Theory of . •• • • • .. . . . . . . . . 389, 390

Prof. J.D.; on California glacier;;. 326

Vitis, Supposed fossil ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396

; Mount Shasta gla-

Voigt, Johann Karl Wilhelm, on sand-

ciers ......•••.•.. .'. 332

stones ......... .". . ...... . . . . . . . . 219

, red snow on Mount

on the· Pearolithes of the Museum

Shasta . ........... 323

Lenzianum . . . . . .. . . . . •• . . . . . . . . . 402 Whittlesey, Mount.......... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232

Volkmann, G. A., Names given t-o fossil

Wichman, A ........ . ............. 211, 212,213,214

plants by...... . . . . . . . 426 Williams, A. jr ........................... .XXVIII

; degeneration of plants . . . . . . . ... 397

; administrative report ... . 63, 64

; diluvian origin offossil remains. 392

, Prof. H. S ..................XXVI, 52,54

; indigenous theory of fossil

Williamson, W. C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . .. 369

plants....................... 396

, Contributions of, to paleobot-

Volkmannia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 430

any ........................ .415, 424

, Sketch of .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 376

Wade, Melvin S ..... ...... .... ...... ...... 50 Wilson, H. M. .. . ... ............. .. ........ 11,12

Wadsworth, M. E ..•.•........... 191, 193,213,214,

,S.J ....... :.. ...... ..... ... ... .... 6

216, 217,218,220 Winchell, Prof. N.H ... 26, 192,202,206,207,208,225

Wakefield, G. F............................ 6

, on equivalence of slates . . . .. . . . 196

Walch, J. E. Immanuel.................... 400

; map of Minnesota . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181

; diluvian origin of fossil remains . . . 392

; report cited...................... 183

; exotic theory of fossil plants .. . . . . 397 Wind River glaciers. .......... ...... .. . .. 344

; extinct Calamitre . . . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . 398

mountains ........ . ............ 249

; indigenous theory of fossil plants . . 396 Wintun glacier. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . .. . . . 333

; nomenclature and classification of

Wiscon ,in River .. .... . ...............·... 198, 217

1ossil plants ....... . ............ .403, 426

Valley . ............ 211, 213, 214, 216, 228

Walcott, Charles D ......... :. ............ xxv1, 19

, Upper, Schists and quart-

; admillistrative report . 52, 55

zites of...... . ......... 19!

Walled lakes . ........... . ... . ... . ... ...... 109 Witham, Henry T. :M: ......• . . ........ ..... 369, 374

Walling, Prof. H. F ................ xvm,3, 4, 7, 8

, Contributions of, to paleobotany.. 411 .

Ward, Lester F ................•......... XXVI, 50

, Sketch of. ..... , . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . 37·2

; administrative report ...·. 55-59 Wood County, Wisconsin................. . 217

; sketch of paleobotany . ..357-452

, Prof. A.,gaveaccountofMount Hood 339

, Osborne ..... . ............... .. :. . . . . 57 \\Toodward, Dr. John, on the effects of the

Wasatch deposits . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . 252 flood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 391

INDEX.

469

Page.
Wooster, L•.c.............................xxvi, 53

Worring and Auer's invention of physio-

typy .•...•.••••.•••••• -····- ··~··· ·---

380

Wright, George M .......... .•..... 15, 214, 215, 331

Wyoming Division, The.................... 10

Eocene lake basin-·.......... . . . 249

Xanthus ........•.•..••.•••...•.•••.••••••. 386 Xenophanes ·on the significance of fossil
she1ls ... . . : .....•...•.••.••••••..••.•••.886, 398

Page. Yale College museum; Wyoming fossils . . . 251
252, 255, 261, 265, 276 Yeates,C.M ............................... 5 Yellowstone National Park survey ......XX, 15-19 Young, A. A., describes a santlstono . . . . . . . 220 Yuccites _...............•... _. _.......... .415, 448
Zamia angustifolia ....,.......... _. ...... . . . . 447 Zenker, Jonathan Carl, Contributions of, to
paleobotany............................. . 411 ZirkeL .•••..••.........•..•·••.•..•..••.•.. 219 220

c

.l /
,

