Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering
journal homepage: www.rockgeotech.org
Full Length Article
Experiments on thermo-hydro-mechanical behaviour of Opalinus Clay at Mont Terri rock laboratory, Switzerland
Paul Bossart*, David Jaeggi, Christophe Nussbaum
Swiss Geological Survey at swisstopo, Wabern, Switzerland

article info
Article history: Received 10 August 2016 Received in revised form 12 November 2016 Accepted 14 November 2016 Available online 29 April 2017
Keywords: Deep geological disposal Radioactive waste Demonstration experiments Engineered barrier system (EBS) Granular backﬁll material (GBM) Bentonite Thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) behaviour

abstract
Repositories for deep geological disposal of radioactive waste rely on multi-barrier systems to isolate waste from the biosphere. A multi-barrier system typically comprises the natural geological barrier provided by the repository host rock e in our case the Opalinus Clay e and an engineered barrier system (EBS). The Swiss repository concept for spent fuel and vitriﬁed high-level waste (HLW) consists of waste canisters, which are emplaced horizontally in the middle of an emplacement gallery and are separated from the gallery wall by granular backﬁll material (GBM). We describe here a selection of ﬁve in-situ experiments where characteristic hydro-mechanical (HM) and thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) processes have been observed. The ﬁrst example is a coupled HM and mine-by test where the evolution of the excavation damaged zone (EDZ) was monitored around a gallery in the Opalinus Clay (ED-B experiment). Measurements of pore-water pressures and convergences due to stress redistribution during excavation highlighted the HM behaviour. The same measurements were subsequently carried out in a heater test (HE-D) where we were able to characterise the Opalinus Clay in terms of its THM behaviour. These yielded detailed data to better understand the THM behaviours of the granular backﬁll and the natural host rock. For a presentation of the Swiss concept for HLW storage, we designed three demonstration experiments that were subsequently implemented in the Mont Terri rock laboratory: (1) the engineered barrier (EB) experiment, (2) the in-situ heater test on key-THM processes and parameters (HE-E) experiment, and (3) the full-scale emplacement (FE) experiment. The ﬁrst demonstration experiment has been dismantled, but the last two ones are on-going. Ó 2017 Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction
1.1. Rationale
Concepts for geological disposal of radioactive waste are generally based on a multi-barrier system, consisting of an engineered barrier system (EBS) and the host rock formation. The overall objective of nuclear waste disposal in geological formations is to ensure permanent containment of the waste. To construct a repository and ensure the safe containment of the nuclear waste over a very long time period, it is indispensable to have
* Corresponding author. E-mail address: paul.bossart@swisstopo.ch (P. Bossart). Peer review under responsibility of Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences.

comprehensive knowledge about the material behaviour of the coupled system of waste containers, EBS, and host rock.
The present Swiss multi-barrier concept consists of three barriers, two inner engineered barriers and one outer geological claystone barrier. The two inner barriers consist of (1) the cylindrical steel canister containing the high-level waste (HLW), which is emplaced in the middle of the tunnel section, and (2) the granular backﬁll material (GBM) that ﬁlls the gap between the canister and the claystone. The cylindrical steel canisters would be emplaced horizontally in the middle of the tunnel section, separated from the tunnel wall by GBM, which consists, in the Swiss version, of a bentonite buffer. The term “bentonite buffer” refers to all bentonite materials in a disposal tunnel. The bentonite buffer is part of the EBS and thus contributes to the retardation of radionuclides (Nagra, 2002). The third and natural barrier is the Opalinus Clay. This indurated claystone has been selected in Switzerland as the preferred host rock for disposal of HLW and is among the

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrmge.2016.11.014 1674-7755 Ó 2017 Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

503

possible host rocks for low and intermediate level radioactive waste. In this context, the behaviour of the EBS together with the Opalinus Clay has been and is being intensively investigated in the Mont Terri rock laboratory.
1.2. The Mont Terri rock laboratory in the Opalinus Clay
The Mont Terri rock laboratory is a generic underground research facility in the Opalinus Clay (Figs. 1 and 2) and is operated by swisstopo in its capacity as a centre of competence and a neutral organisation of the Swiss federal government. Sixteen partners from Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Spain, Switzerland, and the US are involved in the experimental programme. The laboratory is used exclusively for research purposes; disposal of radioactive waste in the facility does not come into question. Experimental test results from the Mont Terri rock laboratory over the last two decades show that the Opalinus Clay is capable of conﬁning radioactive substances over very long time periods and isolating them from the biosphere (Bossart et al., 2017).
The Opalinus Clay at the Mont Terri site is a 130 m thick, overconsolidated claystone of Aalenian-Toarcian age (174 Ma), overlain by 800 m of Middle to Late Jurassic limestones, marls and shales, and underlain by 400 m of Early Jurassic to Triassic marls and limestones, dolomites, and anhydrites (Fig. 2a and b). Its

mineralogy consists of 30e80 wt% clay minerals, 10e40 wt% quartz and 5e35 wt% carbonates. Water content is around 7 wt% and hydraulic conductivity varies between 10À12 m/s and 10À14 m/s. No water ﬂows under normal hydraulic gradients. Opalinus Clay swells in contact with water; expansion and increased pressure due to swelling perpendicular to the bedding reaches 10% and 1 MPa, respectively. The uniaxial compressive strength of the saturated Opalinus Clay varies between 10 MPa (shaly facies) and 35 MPa (sandy and carbonate rich facies). Desaturated Opalinus Clay shows shrinkage cracks and signiﬁcantly increased compressive strengths and stiffness.
1.3. Thermo-hydro-mechanical in-situ experiments in the Opalinus Clay
HLW produces heat, even when it has passively cooled down for several years before disposal. This requires an assessment of the performance of the EBS and the Opalinus Clay under nonisothermal conditions so that the impact of heat on the engineered barrier (bentonite buffer) and geological barrier (Opalinus Clay) is well understood. The behaviours of bentonite and Opalinus Clay under thermal loading have to be considered in the framework of thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) coupling processes. Temperature variations in the bentonite and Opalinus Clay will change

Fig. 1. The Mont Terri rock laboratory. (a) Geographic location: the rock laboratory is located alongside the Mont Terri motorway tunnel in the Canton Jura, Switzerland, and (b) perspective view of the rock laboratory, which has a total length of 700 m including galleries and niches (status 2016).

504 P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

Fig. 2. (a) Geological proﬁle along the Mont Terri motorway tunnel and location of the rock laboratory, and (b) geological map of the rock laboratory. The location of the different experiments described in this paper are indicated with blue rectangles and labelled according to their respective name and ﬁgure number.

hydraulic behaviour due to changes of pore pressures and variation of ﬂuid viscosity. This will affect the mechanical behaviour and thermally induced strains will develop. Hydraulic and mechanical behaviours may interact with the thermal response through induced variations of thermal conductivity.
For this presentation, ﬁve in-situ test examples were selected, where characteristic hydro-mechanical (HM) and THM processes have been observed. The ﬁrst example is a mine-by test, where the evolution of the excavation damaged zone (EDZ) was monitored around a gallery in the Opalinus Clay (ED-B experiment, Section

2.1). Next is a heater test (HE-D) where the Opalinus Clay was characterised in terms of its THM behaviour (Section 2.2). For the demonstration of the Swiss concept for HLW storage, between 2001 and 2016, we designed and implemented three engineered barrier experiments in the Mont Terri rock laboratory. These are, in order of increasing complexity: (1) the EB experiment (Section 2.3), (2) the in-situ heater test on key-THM processes and parameters (HE-E) experiment (Section 2.4), and (3) the full-scale emplacement (FE) experiment (Section 2.5). The engineered barrier (EB) experiment ran between 2001 and 2012 and was dismantled in

P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

505

2013, whereas HE-E and FE experiments are still on-going. In the following sections, we present the aims, concepts, designs, and implementations of these experiments.
2. Aims and methodology of the ﬁve experiments
The aim of the THM experiments, which have been and are presently being carried out in the Mont Terri rock laboratory, is to better understand the coupled THM processes, estimate in-situ parameters in the metre to decametre scale, and develop conceptual models and constitutional laws to simulate repository performance. The latter then serve to simulate the THM behaviour of the early stage of a repository evolution (THM models and our modelling procedures are not part of this paper and will be treated elsewhere). The common aim of the EB, HE-E and FE experiments is to demonstrate and optimise the main components of the EBS, which means testing of canister and backﬁlling materials and their interaction with the host rock, i.e. the Opalinus Clay.
2.1. The ED-B experiment (mine-by test, evolution of an excavation damaged zone around a gallery)
Coupled HM behaviour of the rock mass is best investigated during mine-by experiments. The concept of these large-scale experiments consists of four main components: (1) installation of a monitoring system for far-ﬁeld responses and evaluation of steadystate conditions, (2) predictive modelling using available codes and constitutive laws, (3) monitoring during and after excavation of a

tunnel for the evaluation of the transient behaviour, and (4) validation of the predictions using monitoring data. Instrumentation of mine-by experiments comprises deployment of pore-water pressure sensors, deformation sensors, such as extensometers and inclinometers, as well as a continuous survey of convergences by means of regular manual INVAR wire measurements or by automated total stations targeting three-dimensional (3D) reﬂectors and sending data automatically over the network to a database. An example of a very early mine-by experiment conducted in the Mont Terri rock laboratory is given in Fig. 3 (Martin et al., 2002; Martin and Lanyon, 2004). In the frame-work of the ED-B experiment (evolution of EDZ around a gallery in claystone) in 1997, borehole BED-B2 was drilled horizontally from the existing security gallery w24 m into the rock mass (for location, see Fig. 2b). The borehole was equipped with measuring instruments at four intervals (coloured dots in Fig. 3a), allowing monitoring of in-situ pore-water pressure. Intervals I1 e I3 are located close to the future experimental Gallery 98, whereas I4 is located more than 10 m away (Fig. 3a).
2.2. The HE-D experiment (heater test, THM behaviour of the Opalinus Clay)
Besides HM coupling during excavations, THM responses will also be important in future repositories for spent fuel and HLW. In emplacement galleries, hot waste canisters will be emplaced and their heat loss will considerably affect the system’s behaviour within the ﬁrst decades to hundreds of years after emplacement. At

Fig. 3. (a) Section of observation borehole BED-B2 with location of intervals and position of Gallery 98 where the mine-by test took place, (b) evolution of pore-water pressure during excavation of Gallery 98 for the four test intervals I1eI4 in borehole BED-B2 (left-hand y-axis), distance to the gallery excavation front is indicated on the right-hand y-axis, (c) orientation of the ﬁve tunnel convergence proﬁles at tunnel metre 100 in the Gallery 98, and (d) corresponding convergence evolutions along the proﬁles (Fig. 3c) at tunnel metre 100. Convergences are less than 1% of the tunnel diameter.

506 P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

Fig. 4. (a) Plan view of the HE-D borehole network. BHE-D0 is the heater borehole containing heaters 1 and 2, (b) cross-sectional view perpendicular to the central borehole with heaters at the origin and positions of the 5 observation boreholes, (c) temperature evolution in the 5 boreholes after start of heating (two steps of heating power were applied: 650 W and 1950 W, recovery started after 340 d), and (d) corresponding pore pressure evolution in the 5 boreholes.

Mont Terri, THM responses are investigated with large-scale heater experiments (Bossart and Thury, 2008). An example of such a heater experiment is the HE-D experiment (heater test, THM behaviour of host rock), which was realised at the junction of a gallery and a niche (Fig. 4a) (Wileveau, 2005). A horizontal 300-mm diameter borehole was drilled parallel to bedding in the gallery wall. Two heaters were installed in this borehole to simulate heat production of high-level radioactive waste. From the side niche, numerous small-diameter observation boreholes were drilled above and below the central borehole containing heaters, which have been equipped with temperature, pore-water pressure, and deformation sensors. The exact locations of some selected intervals with respect to the central heater borehole BHE-D0 are shown in Fig. 4b.
2.3. The EB experiment (engineered barrier, 1:1 scale, no heating, artiﬁcial saturation)
The ﬁrst of these engineered barrier experiments is the EB experiment, which aims to demonstrate the feasibility of a backﬁll technique applied to a horizontal emplacement gallery in a consolidated clay formation. This particular set-up used bentonite pellets as backﬁll material in the upper part of the barrier and bentonite blocks at the bottom (Mayor et al., 2007a, b). The concept of the EB experiment comprises ﬁrst installing a dummy canister on the top of a bentonite block bed (Fig. 5). In the space between canister and rock, 20 sensors were installed, including total pressure cells, extensometers for canister emplacement, and capacitive humidity sensors. The remaining gap between the canister and the rock was backﬁlled with a GBM. This GBM consisted of bentonite pellets of Serrata clay from Spain. A concrete plug isolated the test section. In the Opalinus Clay around the test section, several

boreholes were drilled and instrumented with 20 pore-water piezometers, 3 extensometers, several seismic interval velocity sensors, and electrode chains for geoelectrical measurements. To accelerate the hydration process, an artiﬁcial hydration system with a combination of pipes and geotextile mats was installed around the canister. Long-term seismic and geoelectrical monitoring was carried out during the saturation of the GBM (Kruschwitz and Yaramanci, 2002; Schuster and Alheid, 2002).
2.4. The HE-E experiment (in-situ heater test, 1:2.5 scale, heating, natural saturation)
After evaluating results of the long-term EB experiment, we designed an HE-E experiment comprising heated sections without artiﬁcial saturation. The aim of the HE-E experiment was to identify the processes in the early non-isothermal resaturation period and to understand its impact on the THM behaviour. Results from this experiment provide an experimental database required for calibration and validation of existing THM models of the early resaturation phase, and enable us to upscale thermal conductivity of the partially saturated EBS from laboratory to ﬁeld scale for pure bentonite and bentonite-sand mixtures. The concept of the experiment is as follows (Schäfers et al., 2014): in the ﬁrst step, a railway was installed in the 50-m-long microtunnel with a diameter of 1.3 m (diameter is about half that of an emplacement gallery). Subsequently, the borehole installations around the 10-m-long test section were reactivated (most of these sensors were installed in the framework of the ventilation test (Mayor et al., 2007b); more than 90% of these old sensors were still running at the start of HE-E in 2011). The EBS steel liner equipment was assembled on-site, transported along the microtunnel, and installed in the test section (Fig. 6). Three concrete plugs, themselves containing thermal

P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

507

Fig. 5. The EB experiment shows (a) the design of the experiment, and (b) the implementation in the Mont Terri rock laboratory before complete ﬁlling with granular bentonite. The small tubes are used to provide artiﬁcial saturation after emplacement of the granular bentonite, ﬁlling the gap between dummy canister (here in the centre) and rock. There is no heating source in the canister.

insulation and a vapour barrier, separated the test sections in the tunnel. In the ﬁnal step, two 4-m-long heaters were inserted into the central steel liner. Then an auger system was used to emplace the GBM in the test section and ﬁnally the heaters were turned on.
2.5. The FE experiment (full-scale emplacement, 1:1 scale, heating, natural saturation)
In complexity and size, the FE experiment is currently the largest installation in the Mont Terri rock laboratory. The main aim of the FE experiment is to investigate the repository-induced THM coupling effects on the host rock at a 1:1 scale, and to validate existing coupled THM models. The concept consists of emplacing 3 canisters onto bentonite blocks in the 50-m-long FE gallery (in the diameter of 3 m, same as that of an emplacement gallery; for location see Fig. 2). Canister dimensions are similar to those planned for the Swiss concept (Fig. 7). No waste is in the canisters in the FE experiment, but each canister contains a heater with 1350 W power. Unique to this experiment is a specially developed and manufactured backﬁlling machine, a prototype for the horizontal emplacement of the GBM (Mueller et al., 2017). The heaters in the three canisters were turned on in September 2016.
3. Selected key results from the THM and EBS experiments
In the ED-B mine-by test, after an equilibration period of a few months, in-situ pore-water pressures in all four intervals reached 1.9e2 MPa, which correspond to the undisturbed hydrostatic

pressure observed at rock laboratory level (Fig. 3b). Then excavation of the circular-shaped Gallery 98 (in the diameter of w3 m) was started from the northern side, approaching tunnel metre 87 (TM87), where borehole BED-B2 is located with the four intervals for monitoring pore pressure. About 40 m and 10 m before reaching the section at TM87, pore pressures in all 4 intervals of borehole BED-B2 began to rise. Peak pressure of almost 2.5 MPa, corresponding to an overpressure of 0.5 MPa, was reached at TM87 in intervals I1eI3. Peak pressure in the distant interval I4 was considerably attenuated and delayed, circumscribing the zone inﬂuenced by the induced stress redistribution. Post-peak pressures declined inversely proportional to their distance from the gallery. In the near-ﬁeld distance of a few metres, the EDZ leads to a pressure drop well below the original in-situ pressure. After about 600 h from the start of the excavation, pressures slightly rise again. Just after the excavation, convergences are maximal (Fig. 3c and d). Gallery 98 is oriented perpendicular to the strike of the bedding and thus rock mechanically in an orientation, leading to the maximal convergences in the sidewalls, where mechanically induced fractures and/or extensile fractures occur. These deformations lead to a pronounced post-peak pressure drop in the near-ﬁeld of the gallery. After w600 h when excavation has begun, the shotcrete lining takes over and the near-ﬁeld self-sealing effects of the swelling clay minerals begin to dominate, leading to the slight pressure increase in I1eI3.
After construction of an emplacement gallery, the heat generating HLW is emplaced and backﬁlled. Thus the HE-D experiment simulates the THM behaviour of the host rock after emplacement,

508 P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

Fig. 6. The HE-E experiment. (a) Experiment design, and (b) implementation in the Mont Terri rock laboratory. Both tubes were assembled in the niche with heaters and then moved into the microtunnel. The space between heater 1 and Opalinus Clay was ﬁlled with granular bentonite in the rear, and the space between heater 2 and Opalinus Clay was ﬁlled with a granular sand/bentonite mixture in the frontal part. The heaters are separated by 3 concrete plugs in the frontal, middle, and rear test section parts.

where radial distances from monitoring intervals to the heated central borehole range from 0.4 m to 3.3 m. After a short equilibration phase, the heaters were turned on with an initial heating power of 650 W, leading to a temperature of 55 C at heater surface (BHE-D1). After 92 d, the heating power was increased to 1950 W, which led to temperatures close to 130 C at heater surface after more than 300 d (Fig. 4c). Temperatures in observation boreholes clearly show a correlation to distance from the heater. Opalinus Clay acts as a thermal insulator, which prevents rapid heat transport away from the heated borehole. Pore-water pressure responses in a completely saturated and extremely low-permeable environment react very quickly to temperature changes (Zhang et al., 2007). The pore pressure evolution (shown in Fig. 4d) was much more complex than the temperature evolution (Fig. 4c). BHE-D16 is located w0.9 m from the heater and shows a much higher pore pressure response than BHE-D14, which is at only 0.4 m distance from the heater. The explanation for this discrepancy is found by noting the location of the sensors with respect to the rock anisotropy. Along the bedding anisotropy, the pressure pulse is more pronounced than that perpendicular to bedding. Furthermore, for these two sensors in the near-ﬁeld, an early pressure peak is reached with a subsequent pressure release. For the sensor BHE-D17 at the farﬁeld, pressure is continuously increasing during a heating phase and peak pressure is reached at the very end. Sensors in the nearﬁeld are located within the borehole disturbed zone of the central

300-mm borehole, where the damage of the rock mass leads to pressure dissipation in the long term; whereas away from the damage zone, pressure builds up continuously until the end of the heating phase. The pressure disturbance in the farthest interval BHE-D13 in the footwall is very low compared to that of BHE-D17 at a similar radial distance but located in the hanging wall.
Whereas HE-D was a heated-borehole-scale experiment, the EB experiment was dedicated to simulating the behaviour of a 1:1 scale EBS with artiﬁcial saturation under non-heated conditions (Fig. 5a and b). In 2001, there were some difﬁculties in emplacing the GBM due to hydration tubes interfering with sensors between the canister and the Opalinus Clay. This meant that the mean achieved density of 1.36 g/cm3 was lower than expected and there was signiﬁcant density variation in the GBM (dry density in upper part higher than that at the bottom). Artiﬁcial saturation lasted for about 6 years under isothermal conditions, and the experiment continued for a further 5-year. Key results of the EB experiment were (Palacios et al., 2013; Schäfers et al., 2014): after ﬁnal saturation, the hydraulic conductivity of the buffer was very low (<5 Â 10À12 m/s) and the swelling pressure rose to about 2 MPa. In 2012, dismantling conﬁrmed that the bentonite barrier (bentonite blocks and GBM) was highly saturated (>95%), and there was also a clear trend for moisture content to increase from top to bottom of the section. P-wave velocities in the EDZ increased during saturation of the GBM, which is interpreted as mechanical closure of the EDZ

P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

509

Fig. 7. The FE (full-scale emplacement) experiment on a real 1:1 scale. (a) Design of the experiment, and (b) implementation in the Mont Terri rock laboratory. The 3 canisters sit on a bed of bentonite blocks. They contain no waste, but a heating source that simulates the heat of high-level radioactive waste. The space between canister and the Opalinus Clay has been ﬁlled with an emplacement machine. Each of the 5 arms (white tubes) contains an auger. These augers transport the granular bentonite into the space around the canister.

fractures in the tunnel wall (Furche and Schuster, 2014). Geoelectrical monitoring during the saturation of the GBM conﬁrmed initial dry density variation of the GBM: the lower apparent electrical resistivity is directly correlated to higher dry densities.
For the heated HE-E experiment (Fig. 6a and b), the dry emplacement densities were clearly higher and more homogeneous than those in the EB experiment. The mean dry density was 1.45 g/cm3 for the pure bentonite, while 1.5 g/cm3 for the sand/ bentonite mixtures. In the GBM buffer, at the beginning, a very strong temperature gradient was observed due to its low thermal conductivity (Gaus et al., 2014). Temperature at the interface between buffer and heater is w140 C, and at the interface between buffer and Opalinus Clay w50 C. Heating causes a further drying of the inner part of the buffer. There, the initial water content was further reduced below the water content at emplacement for both the granular material and the blocks. In the saturated near-ﬁeld, pore-water pressure increase has been measured after initial heating, which is caused by the differential thermal expansion of the Opalinus Clay and the pore-water. The locus of the maximum pressure is still moving towards the test section. So far, no steady state has been obtained. The HE-E experiment will be continued over the next years, closely accompanied by THM modelling.
Recently, the more complex FE experiment has been deployed. This experiment is comparable to the HE-E, but is at 1:1 scale and with a more sophisticated monitoring system (Fig. 7a and b). Emplacement of HLW canisters and their subsequent backﬁll was implemented using a custom-made backﬁlling machine based on 5

augers. With this machine it was possible to obtain a rather homogeneous dry density of >1.45 g/cm3 of the GBM. For monitoring the effects of this full-scale heating on the GBM and the host rock, we installed several hundred sensors in and around the FE tunnel. These sensors measure various parameters such as temperature, pore pressure, deformation, humidity/water content, gas composition, and corrosion. Heating started in early 2015. After 3 years of continuous heating, we expect temperatures of approximately 130e150 C at the surface of the middle heater and approximately 60e80 C at the rock surface. Heating will be continued over a period of 10 years, with decreasing power, and thus lower temperatures (as expected to be the case when heat-producing waste is emplaced in an actual repository). As with the HE-E experiment, the FE experiment is closely accompanied by THM modelling. The ﬁrst results are expected in 2017. It is already clear that the FE experiment is an important step towards validation of the Swiss disposal concept. It may have a direct inﬂuence on the design of future disposal tunnels and also on the loading of the future repository canisters.
4. Conclusions
HM coupling during excavations and THM responses will be important in future repositories for radioactive waste disposal. Therefore, hot waste canisters will be emplaced that considerably affect the system behaviour within the ﬁrst decades to hundreds of years after emplacement. Underground research laboratories like

510 P. Bossart et al. / Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering 9 (2017) 502e510

the Mont Terri rock laboratory provide a privileged environment to conduct classical mine-by tests for the HM behaviour and heater tests for the THM behaviour of claystones (i.e. Opalinus Clay). The key lessons that we have learned over the last two decades of research in the Mont Terri rock laboratory are:
(1) Mine-by tests: the tempo-spatial evolution of pore pressure is sensitive to the excavation of galleries. After an initial increase of pressure due to stress redistribution, creation of an EDZ in the near-ﬁeld distance of a few metres leads to a postpeak pressure drop well below the original in-situ pressure of w2 MPa. After a certain time, the shotcrete lining takes over and near-ﬁeld self-sealing effects of the swelling clay minerals begin to dominate, leading to slight pressure increase.
(2) The THM behaviour of the Opalinus Clay reveals a complex evolution of pore pressure in response to heating. The pressure pulse is more pronounced parallel to bedding anisotropy than that perpendicular to bedding. Furthermore, we recorded a contrasting pore pressure evolution in the near- and far-ﬁeld. In the near-ﬁeld, rock damage around the borehole mass leads to pressure dissipation in the long term, whereas away from the borehole disturbed zone, pressure increases continuously until the end of the heating phase. These results show the inﬂuence of both the rock anisotropy and the borehole disturbed zone.
To demonstrate the Swiss concept for HLW storage, three engineered barrier experiments were designed and have been implemented in the Mont Terri rock laboratory. These experiments were realised in the order of increasing complexity: (1) the EB experiment, (2) the in-situ heater test on key-THM processes and parameters (HE-E) experiment, and (3) the FE experiment. Starting in 2001 with the EB experiment to simulate the behaviour of a 1:1 scale EBS with artiﬁcial saturation under non-heated conditions, the series is still on-going with the more complex FE experiment that was deployed in 2014. This most recent experiment includes a heating system and a more sophisticated monitoring system. The emplacement of HLW canisters and their subsequent backﬁll were demonstrated with a custom-made backﬁlling machine, allowing a homogeneous dry density of >1.45 g/cm3 of the GBM compared to 1.36 g/cm3 obtained for the ﬁrst engineered barrier experiment. The FE experiment can be considered as an important step towards validating the Swiss disposal concept and might have a direct inﬂuence on the design of future disposal tunnels.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors wish to conﬁrm that there are no known conﬂicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no signiﬁcant ﬁnancial support for this work that could have inﬂuenced its outcome.

References
Bossart P, Thury M. Mont Terri rock laboratory. Project, programme 1996 to 2007 and results. Reports of the Swiss Geological Survey, No. 3. Wabern, Switzerland: Federal Ofﬁce of Topography (Swisstopo). 2008. https://www.mont-terri.ch/.
Bossart P, Bernier F, Birkholzer J, Bruggeman C, Connolly P, Dewonck S, Fukaya M, Herfort M, Jensen M, Matray JM, Mayor JC, Moeri A, Oyama T, Schuster K, Shigeta N, Vietor T, Wieczorek K. Mont Terri rock laboratory, 20 years: introduction, geology and overview of papers included in the Special Issue. Swiss Journal of Geosciences 2017;110(1):3e22.
Furche M, Schuster K. Engineered barrier emplacement experiment in Opalinus clay: “EB” experiment, geoelectrical monitoring of dismantling operation. Mont Terri Technical Report TR 2014-04. Wabern, Switzerland: Federal Ofﬁce of Topography (Swisstopo). 2014. https://www.mont-terri.ch/.
Gaus I, Wieczorek K, Schuster K, Garitte B, Senger R, Vasconcelos R, Mayor JC. EBS behaviour immediately after repository closure in a clay host rock: HE-E experiment (Mont Terri URL). Geological Society, London, Special Publications 2014;400(1):71e91.
Kruschwitz S, Yaramanci U. Engineered barrier (EB) experiment: EDZ geophysical characterisation. Detection and characterisation of the disturbed rock zone in claystone with complex valued geoelectrics, Mont Terri rock laboratory. Mont Terri Technical Report, TR 2002-01. Wabern, Switzerland: Federal Ofﬁce of Topography (Swisstopo). 2002. https://www.mont-terri.ch.
Martin CD, Lanyon GW, Blümling P, Mayor JC. The excavation-disturbed zone around a test tunnel in the Opalinus Clay. In: Hammah R, Baden W, Curran J, Telesnicki M, editors. Proceedings of the ﬁfth North American rock mechanics symposium and 17th Tunnelling Association of Canada Conference: NARMS/ TAC. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press; 2002. p. 1581e8.
Martin CC, Lanyon GW. Excavation disturbed zone (EDZ) in clay shale: Mont Terri. Mont Terri Technical Report TR2001e01. Wabern, Switzerland: Federal Ofﬁce of Topography (Swisstopo). 2004. https://www.mont-terri.ch.
Mayor JC, Garcia-Siñeriz JL, Alonso E, Alheid HJ, Blümling P. Engineered barrier emplacement experiment in Opalinus clay for the disposal of radioactive waste in underground repositories. In: Bossart P, Nussbaum C, editors. Mont Terri project e heater experiment, engineered barriers emplacement and ventilation tests. Swiss Geological Survey; 2007a. p. 115e79.
Mayor JC, Garcia-Siñeriz JL, Velasco M, Gómez-Hernández J, Lloret A, Matray JM, Coste F, Giraud A, Rothfuchs T, Marschall P, Roesli U, Mayer G. Ventilation experiment in Opalinus clay for the disposal of radioactive waste in underground repositories. In: Bossart P, Nussbaum C, editors. Mont Terri project e heater experiment, engineered barriers emplacement and ventilation tests. Wabern, Switzerland: Swiss Geological Survey; 2007b. p. 181e240.
Mueller HR, Garitte B, Vogt T, Koehler S, Sakaki T, Weber H, Spillmann T, Hertrich M, Becker JK, Giroud N, Cloet V, Diomidis N, Vietor T. Implementation of the fullscale emplacement (FE) experiment at the Mont Terri rock laboratory (Switzerland). Swiss Journal of Geosciences 2017;110:1e20. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/s00015-016-0251-2.
Nagra. Opalinus Clay Project: Demonstration of feasibility of disposal for spent fuel, vitriﬁed high-level waste and long-lived intermediate-level waste. Summary overview. Wettingen, Switzerland: Nagra. 2002. http://www.nagra.ch.
Palacios B, Rey M, Garcia-Siñeriz JL, Villar MV, Mayor JC, Velasco M. Engineered barrier emplacement experiment in Opalinus clay: “EB” experiment. As-built of dismantling operation. PEBS Deliverable-no. D2.1e4. Contract Grant Agreement Number FP7 249681. AITEMIN. 2013.
Schäfers A, Gaus I, Johnson L, Liu Y, Mayor JC, Sellin P, Wieczorek K. PEBS, ﬁnal scientiﬁc report. Deliverable D5e16. European Commission. 2014.
Schuster K, Alheid HJ. Engineered barrier (EB) experiment and geophysical characterisation of the excavation disturbed zone (ED-C) experiment: seismic investigation of the EDZ in the EB niche. Mont Terri Technical Report TR 200203. Wabern, Switzerland: Federal Ofﬁce of Topography (Swisstopo). 2002. https://www.mont-terri.ch.
Wileveau Y. THM behaviour of host rock (HE-D experiment): progress report september 2003 e october 2004 part 1. Mont Terri Technical Report TR 200503. Wabern, Switzerland: Federal Ofﬁce of Topography (Swisstopo). 2005. https://www.mont-terri.ch.
Zhang CL, Rothfuchs T, Jockwer N, Wieczorek K, Dittrich J, Müller J, Hartwig L, Komischke M. Thermal effects on the Opalinus clay, a joint heating experiment of ANDRA and GRS at the Mont Terri URL (HE-D project). Report No. 224. Braunschweig, Germany: GRS. 2007.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Xiangling Li, the scientiﬁc manager of the Praclay Heater Test in the Hades rock laboratory, Mol-Belgium, for encouraging us to write a contribution about the on-going activities in the Mont Terri rock laboratory, especially in the framework of the THM ﬁeld experiments. Raphael Meier and Roman Wipﬂi supported us in drawing of the ﬁgures. We also thank the two anonymous reviewers for signiﬁcantly improving the manuscript. Roy Freeman is thanked for reviewing the English of the manuscript.

Dr. Paul Bossart was born in 1956 in Switzerland. He obtained his MSc and PhD at ETH (Federal Polytechnic University, Zurich) in 1980 and 1986, respectively. He was appointed as the Director of the International Mont Terri project in 2006. From 2009, he worked for planning and realization of the Mont Terri Visitor Center up to 2011. In 2014e2017, he was engaged in planning of the Mont Terri rock laboratory extension (2018e2019), fund raising, and elaboration of new research programme for the time 2020e2030.

