Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Ore Geology Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/oregeorev

Roles of xenomelts, xenoliths, xenocrysts, xenovolatiles, residues, and skarns in the genesis, transport, and localization of magmatic Fe-Ni-Cu-PGE sulﬁdes and chromite
C.M. Lesher
Mineral Exploration Research Centre, Harquail School of Earth Sciences and Goodman School of Mines, Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario P3E 2C6, Canada

T

ARTICLE INFO
Keywords: Xenoliths Xenomelts Sulﬁde transport Ore localization Fe-Ni-Cu-PGE Sulﬁde Chromite

ABSTRACT
Most sulﬁde-rich magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits form in dynamic magmatic systems by partial melting Sbearing wall rocks with variable degrees of assimilation of miscible silicate and volatile components, and generation of barren to weakly-mineralized immiscible Fe sulﬁde xenomelts into which Ni-Cu-Co-PGE partition from the magma. Some exceptionally-thick magmatic Cr deposits may form by partial melting oxide-bearing wall rocks with variable degrees of assimilation of the miscible silicate and volatile components, and generation of barren Fe ± Ti oxide xenocrysts into which Cr-Mg-V ± Ti partition from the magma. The products of these processes are variably preserved as skarns, residues, xenoliths, xenocrysts, xenomelts, and xenovolatiles, which play important to critical roles in ore genesis, transport, localization, and/or modiﬁcation. Incorporation of barren xenoliths/autoliths may induce small amounts of sulﬁde/chromite to segregate, but incorporation of sulﬁde xenomelts or oxide xenocrysts with dynamic upgrading of metal tenors (PGE > Cu > Ni > Co and Cr > V > Ti, respectively) is required to make signiﬁcant ore deposits. Silicate xenomelts are only rarely preserved, but will be variably depleted in chalcophile and ferrous metals. Less dense felsic xenoliths may aid upward sulﬁde transport by increasing the eﬀective viscosity and decreasing the bulk density of the magma. Denser maﬁc or metamorphosed xenoliths may also increase the eﬀective viscosity of the magma, but may aid downward sulﬁde transport by increasing the bulk density of the magma. Sulﬁde wets olivine, so olivine xenocrysts may act as ﬁlter beds to collect advected ﬁnely dispersed sulﬁde droplets, but other silicates and xenoliths may not be wetted by sulﬁdes. Xenovolatiles may retard settling of – or in some cases ﬂoat – dense sulﬁde droplets. Reactions of sulﬁde melts with felsic country rocks may generate Fe-rich skarns that may allow sulﬁde melts to fractionate to more extreme Cu-Ni-rich compositions. Xenoliths, xenocrysts, xenomelts, and xenovolatiles are more likely to be preserved in cooler basaltic magmas than in hotter komatiitic magmas, and are more likely to be preserved in less dynamic (less turbulent) systems/domain/phases than in more dynamic (more turbulent) systems/domains/phases. Massive to semi-massive Ni-Cu-PGE and Cr mineralization and xenoliths are often localized within footwall embayments, dilations/jogs in dikes, throats of magma conduits, and the horizontal segments of dike-chonolith and dike-sill complexes, which represent ﬂuid dynamic traps for both ascending and descending sulﬁdes/oxides. If skarns, residues, xenoliths, xenocrysts, xenomelts, and/or xenovolatiles are present, they provide important constraints on ore genesis and they are valuable exploration indicators, but they must be included in elemental and isotopic mass balance calculations.

1. Introduction
Geological, geochemical, isotopic, thermodynamic, and ﬂuid dynamic constraints require that the sulﬁde in most high-grade magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits (e.g., Kambalda, Noril’sk, Pechenga, Raglan, Sudbury, Thompson, Voisey’s Bay) was derived by melting of S-bearing country rocks during lava/magma emplacement (e.g., Lesher et al.,

1984; Lesher and Groves, 1986; Ripley, 1986; Naldrett, 2004; Arndt et al., 2005; Barnes and Lightfoot, 2005; Keays and Lightfoot, 2010; Ripley and Li, 2013; Barnes et al., 2016). Because the solubility of sulﬁde in silicate melts is so low (e.g., Haughton et al., 1974; Shima and Naldrett, 1975; Wendlandt, 1982; Mavrogenes and O’Neill, 1999), any more than small amounts of sulﬁde must have existed as initially Co-NiCu-PGE-poor sulﬁde xenomelts1 that were upgraded through

E-mail address: mlesher@laurentian.ca. 1 Xenomelts, xenocrysts, and xenovolatiles are foreign melts, crystals, and volatiles derived by partial or wholesale melting of country rocks or country-rock xenoliths. They are collectively referred to as xenophases.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oregeorev.2017.08.008 Received 19 January 2017; Received in revised form 1 August 2017; Accepted 2 August 2017 Available online 07 August 2017 0169-1368/ © 2017 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

Fig. 1. Schematic models for dynamic (ﬂow-through) volcanic (A) and subvolcanic/intrusive (B) systems involving early (T1) thermomechanical erosion of S-rich horizons and generation of xenoliths, sulﬁde xenomelts, silicate xenomelts, and xenovolatiles, followed by (T2) dynamic upgrading of metal tenors in sulﬁde xenomelts, and (T3) crystallization of the host unit with or without (depending on size and temperature of host unit and thermal state and physical properties) contact metamorphism of the substrate or country rocks. Modiﬁed after Lesher and Keays (2002).

interaction with the magma during transport and emplacement (Lesher and Campbell, 1993).
Similar arguments can be made that the oxide in some exceptionally-thick chromite deposits (e.g., Black Thor-Blackbird, possibly also Inyala, Ipueira-Medrado, Kemi, Nkomati, or Sukinda) may have been derived by partial melting of oxide-bearing country rocks during lava/magma emplacement. Because the solubility of Cr-rich spinel in most silicate melts is so low, it also would have existed as initially Cr-poor Fe ± Ti oxide xenocrysts that were converted to chromite through interaction with the magma during transport and emplacement (e.g., Lesher et al., 2014, 2016, submitted; Carson et al., 2015).
Despite the broad consensus on the need for external S to generate high-grade Ni-Cu-PGE deposits and emerging recognition of the need for external oxide to generate high-grade Cr deposits, there remain signiﬁcant uncertainties regarding from where, in which direction, and how far sulﬁdes/oxides were transported. Many models involve formation at depth with vertical transport to higher levels, but there are several problems with such models:

1) Fe-Cr oxides (up to 5.2 g cm−3) and Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melts (∼4.2 gcm−3) are much denser than most silicate magmas (2.6–2.8 g-cm−3) and most crustal rocks (2.7–2.9 g-cm−3), which restricts the amounts of sulﬁde/oxide that can be transported in buoyantly rising magmas.
2) Xenoliths may reduce the eﬀective viscosity and bulk density of the magma enough to allow the magma to transport greater amounts of sulﬁdes, but the xenoliths in many systems are as dense or denser than the magma – either originally or after thermal metamorphism – and where well characterized (e.g., Duluth, Noril’sk, Voisey’s Bay) they appear to be local country rocks, not deeper crustal rocks. Exceptions include Aguablanca and Sudbury, which contains exotic ultramaﬁc inclusions not in equilibrium with the host magmas or present in the footwall/country rocks (e.g., Piña et al., 2006; Naldrett et al., 1984; Prevec et al., 2000)
3) Importantly, no Ni-Cu-PGE or Cr deposits are known to occur in lavas except where there is geological, stratigraphic, geochemical, and isotopic evidence that the sulﬁdes formed at the same stratigraphic level (e.g., Alexo, Kambalda, Raglan), even when the subvolcanic plumbing systems locally contain signiﬁcant mineralization

466

C.M. Lesher
(e.g., Deccan, Duluth, Emeishan, Noril’sk, Thompson). Similarly, where there is subvolcanic mineralization, overlying lavas are not enriched in PGE, as would be expected from lavas carrying ﬁne suspended sulﬁdes even if S had been lost during degassing (S.J. Barnes, pers. comm., 2017).
Together, these points suggest that sulﬁdes and oxides are not easily transported upwards and that the systems where we ﬁnd them were very eﬃcient in collecting these phases.
The aim of this paper is to discuss the roles of sulﬁde and silicate xenomelts, xenoliths, xenocrysts, xenovolatiles, residues, and skarns in the genesis of magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE deposits, but there are also implications for magmatic Cr deposits. As we shall see, these components not only inﬂuence the mass balance of metals in the ore-forming system, but they can play active roles in the formation, transport, and deposition of Fe-Ni-Cu-(PGE) sulﬁde melts and chromite.
2. Multi-component systems
Most geological, geochemical, and isotopic models for the formation of magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) and Cr deposits consider the system to contain only two or possibly three components: 1) a silicate magma and 2) an immiscible Fe-Ni-Cu-(PGE) sulﬁde melt or a crystalline Fe-Cr-(Mg)(Al) oxide phase, with or without 3) olivine phenocrysts. In some cases, the systems are that simple, but in many cases, including the worldclass Duluth, Kambalda, Noril’sk-Talnakh, Sudbury, and Voisey’s Bay systems, they are more complex involving silicate magma, sulﬁde melt, xenoliths, silicate/oxide xenocrysts, silicate xenomelts, xenovolatiles, residues, and/or skarns (Fig. 1).
At Kambalda (Fig. 2), for example, the ore-forming system included a thick basaltic substrate covered by a thin cherty-sulﬁdic-graphitic sediment (Fig. 3B: unconsolidated at the time) that was covered by a channelized komatiite sheet ﬂow containing multiple subparallel thicker higher-ﬂux channel-ﬂow facies ﬂanked by multiple thinner lower-ﬂux sheet-ﬂow facies. The channel-ﬂow facies were localized in topographic embayments, which have been locally modiﬁed by

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
thermomechanical erosion along their bases and margins (e.g., Lesher et al., 1984; Groves et al., 1986; Frost and Groves, 1989a,b; Evans et al., 1989; Lesher, 1989; Staude et al., 2016, 2017). Overlying channelized sheet ﬂows followed the same pitchlines and have eroded interﬂow sediments and the upper parts of the basal lava channel (Fig. 3A; Groves et al., 1986).
Because of the high temperature (∼1640 °C) and low-viscosity (∼0.1 Pa s−1) of the komatiitic magma, in this case few xenoliths were preserved. Although channel- and sheet-ﬂow facies contain abundant olivine, it crystallized after ore formation (Lesher, 1989). Silicate xenomelts are rare, but sedimentary xenomelts are locally preserved in the sheet-ﬂow facies (Fig. 3C; Frost and Groves, 1989b) and basalt xenomelts are locally preserved within semi-massive sulﬁdes along the base and margins of the embayments (Frost and Groves, 1989a; Staude et al., 2016, 2017). Residues of partially devolatilized sediments occur along the outside ﬂanking margins of the ore-localizing embayments (Fig. 3D; Lesher and Burnham, 2001).
Each of these components is evident in the geochemical data (Fig. 4) where the components derived from the sediments (sulﬁde xenomelt, silicate xenomelt, and residues) deﬁne an extract triangle containing the bulk compositions of unmodiﬁed sediments). Exchange of metals between the lava and the sulﬁde xenomelts (e.g., Campbell and Naldrett, 1979; Lesher and Burnham, 2001) increased the metal contents of the sulﬁdes (represented by the ores) and decreased the metal contents in the magmas (ﬂushed downstream but rarely preserved as silicate xenomelts in the upper parts of the ﬂanking sheet ﬂows (Fig. 4; Lesher et al., 2001; Barnes et al., 2013).
The following sections will focus on each of the xenophases.
3. Sulﬁde xenomelts
The strongest evidence that some and in many cases most of the S in magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE deposits is derived from crustal rocks and not mantle-derived magmas is provided by S isotopic data (Fig. 5). Several points must be remembered when evaluating S isotopic data:
Fig. 2. Schematic section through a typical Kambalda ore environment after removal of superimposed deformation (modiﬁed from Gresham and Loftus-Hills, 1981; Lesher et al., 1981, 1984; Groves et al., 1986) showing contact ore localization in constructional embayment in footwall basalts (see Lesher and Barnes, 2009), local melting of lateral margins (pinchouts) and substrate by massive sulﬁdes (Lesher et al., 1984; Lesher, 1989; Staude et al., 2016; Staude et al., 2017), local preservation of sediment xenomelts in ﬂanking sheet-ﬂow facies (Frost and Groves, 1989), and thermomechanical of the ﬂow top and upper random spinifex zone of the lowermost host unit by sulﬁde melt at the base of an overlying ﬂow unit, melting and displacing interstitial basaltic glass, forming silicate domes (Groves et al., 1986).

467

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

Fig. 3. A: Photograph of the erosional contact depicted in the upper part of Fig. 2, showing the erosional contact between an overlying mineralized komatiite ﬂow (CK = cumulate komatiite) and a beheaded underlying komatiite ﬂow, Lunnon 628 stope. Thermomechanical erosion has removed the upper ﬂow-top breccia and random olivine spinifex zones of the ﬂow (preserved along strike), massive Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melt (M$) has melted, percolated downwards, and displaced basaltic interstitial melt between underlying platy olivine spinifex zone, forming spinifex-textured ore (PSX$) and basaltic silicate domes (arrows). Photo by MJ Donaldson. B: Photograph of a typical cherty sulﬁdic sediment at Kambalda. Light layers are chert-albite, brown layers are mainly pyrrhotite (Sul), and darker layers are chert-albite with ﬁne-grained graphite. C: Photograph of a felsic “ocellite” (xenomelt) at Kambalda. Light globules are chert-albite, dark matrix is aphanitic to ﬁne random olivine spinifex-textured komatiite (Kom). D: Photograph of a chlorite-sulﬁde rich sedimentary residue at Kambalda. Dark layers are mainly chlorite (Chl), brown layers are mainly pyrrhotite (Sul). E: Photograph of lower margin of the Katinniq Ultramaﬁc Complex showing contact between basal pyroxenite (Pxnt), strongly recrystallized semipelite (HornA), and hornfelsed semipelite (HornB). Hammer is ∼40 cm long. F: Photograph of fresh surface of strongly recrystallized semipelite. Pencil for scale. G: Photograph of fresh surface of hornfelsed semipelite. Pencil for scale. H: Photomicrograph of hornfelsed semipelite in G. Plane-polarized light. Width of photo is ∼8 mm. I: Photograph of semipelite (slate) away from contact metamorphic aureole. Hammer is ∼30 cm long. J: Photograph of semipelite (slate) in drill core showing dark colour (due to abundant ﬁne graphite) and pyrrhotite-rich layers. K-L: Gabbroic melt ﬁlms and diapirs along the contact between massive pyrrhotite-pentlandite-chalcopyrite and underlying gabbro, Katinniq. Height of images is ∼60 cm. M: Irregular (erosional) photograph of a contact between massive pyrrhotite-chalcopyrite-pentlandite and argillite footwall rocks at Noril’sk. Blast hole is ∼5 cm in diameter. N: Photograph of melted layers of argillite in massive in massive pyrrhotite-chalcopyrite-pentlandite. Blast hole is ∼5 cm in diameter.

1) Many authors report ranges of −2 to +2‰ δ34S for “mantle” S, but some authors report ranges as wide as −5 to +5‰ or more. Such ranges are normally derived from the S isotopic compositions of
mid-ocean ridge basalts (MORB), which form by melting of asthe-
nospheric mantle, but often misleadingly include the ranges for sulfate and sulﬁde, which fractionated on the seaﬂoor after emplacement. When allowances are made for seaﬂoor fractionation, the composition of MORB is extremely homogeneous at 0.1 ± 0.5‰ δ 34S (Sakai et al., 1984) or −0.91 ± 0.50‰ (Labidi et al., 2012), depending on the extraction method (Sn+2 + H3PO4 vs. HF + CrCl2, respectively). The latter method has been argued to be more accurate, but most ore sulﬁdes have been analyzed using the former method, so it is the more logical reference for the mantle range in Fig. 5. 33S and 36S isotopes in MORB are even more homogenous with mean values of −0.019 ± 0.005‰ Δ33S (mass fractionation-corrected δ33S) and −0.193 ± 0.093‰ Δ36S (mass fractionation-corrected δ36S), regardless of the extraction method (Labidi et al., 2012).
2) Some authors also include rare minor components of mantle (e.g.,
kimberlites) and analyses of individual phases (e.g., inclusions in
diamond) in the ranges they report, but these components are not
representative of the magmas that generate most magmatic Ni-Cu-
PGE deposits. We know this because of the previous point: MORB is
homogeneous because it forms at moderately high degrees of melting (10–15%) and is homogenized in the ridge-melting environment. The sulﬁde undersaturated picritic, komatiitic basaltic, ferropicritic, and komatiitic magmas that generated most high-grade
Ni-Cu-PGE deposits formed at even higher degrees of partial melting (20–50%: e.g., Lesher and Stone, 1996; Arndt et al., 2005) and would have incorporated and homogenized even larger amounts of mantle. These magmas would have been just as close to 0‰ δ34S, Δ33S, and Δ36S and just as homogeneous as MORB, and could not possibly have exhibited the more extreme values reported in some
papers.

3) Just because an ore has a δ34S, Δ32S, or Δ36S value similar to mantle, it does not mean that the S came from the mantle. It only means that the S isotopes in the source had not fractionated away from mantle values.
4) Mass-independent Δ33S and Δ36S values provide additional constraints where multiple Archean S sources are present and/or where mass-dependent fractions are limited (e.g., Bekker et al., 2009; Fiorentini et al., 2012a,b; Hiebert et al., 2013, 2016; Ding et al., 2012), but only mass-dependent δ34S can be used in post-Archean rocks and mass-dependent fractionations provide important constraints on environmental conditions (oxidation state, biogenic activity).
5) S isotopes are sensitive to resetting in the dynamic magmatic systems that characterize deposits of this type, where δ34S (as well as Δ33S and Δ36S) values can be shifted toward mantle values with increasing magma:sulﬁde ratio (R factor) (e.g., Lesher and Stone, 1996; Lesher and Burnham, 2001; Ripley and Li, 2003), but they cannot be shifted away from mantle values by that process.
With these points in mind, the following features are evident in Fig. 5:
1) The S in most Ni-Cu-PGE deposits is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from mantle S.
2) S isotopic compositions of ores are often intermediate between local wall rocks and mantle, consistent with formation from the wall rocks and subsequent exchange with the magma.
3) Where data are available for diﬀerent zones within a deposit (e.g., Eagle: Ding et al., 2012; Sudbury: Ripley et al., 2015; Raglan: Lesher, 2007; Voisey’s Bay: Ripley et al., 1999, 2002), S isotopic compositions often vary systematically from zone to zone, requiring variations in local sources and/or local variations in R factor.
Jinchuan and Nebo-Babel have been used as examples of deposits

468

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

Fig. 4. Ni (A), Zn (B), Pd (C), and Ir (D) vs MgO plots showing compositional variations of Kambalda komatiites, komatiitic basalts, sediments, xenomelts, and residues (data sources in Lesher et al., 2001). The Silver Lake komatiite is composed of channelized sheet ﬂows with thick lower olivine cumulate zones and thin upper spinifex-textured zones (not distinguished here to improve clarity, but all with > 30% MgO are ortho-mesocumulates and most with < 30% MgO are spinifex-textured). Most cumulate rocks are not contaminated (see discussion by Lesher and Arndt, 1995) or depleted in chalcophile elements (see Lesher et al., 2001), spinifex rocks in channel-ﬂow facies are normally not contaminated or depleted in chalcophile elements, and spinifex rocks in sheet-ﬂow facies are often contaminated and – as seen here – depleted in chalcophile elements. Overlying Tripod Hill komatiites (massive and spinifextextured) and Paringa and Devon Consuls basalts are shown for reference. The computed fractional crystallization trend is after Lesher and Arndt (1995). The triangle deﬁnes an extract ﬁeld formed by decoupling of silicate xenomelts (average felsic ocellite), residues (average chloritic sediments), and sulﬁde xenomelts (calculated) during melting of average sediment (see Lesher and Burnham, 2001 for calculation methodology). The chalcophile elements extracted from the depleted komatiites are interpreted to have upgraded the tenors of the sulﬁde xenomelts to produce the observed ore compositions (10–23% Ni, 1000–3500 ppm Pd, 150–500 ppm Ir, 200–400 ppm Zn: Cowden et al., 1986).

containing only mantle-derived S, based on near-mantle S isotopic compositions and the absence of abundant nearby crustal S sources (e.g., Chai and Naldrett, 1992; Seat et al., 2009), but Jinchuan is slightly but signiﬁcantly more positive than mantle (see point 1 above) and S-rich metasediments have since been discovered in the region of Nebo-Babel (Karykowski et al., 2015). The S isotopic compositions of both were likely inﬂuenced by the R factor (see point 5 above).
Although a non-mantle origin for much of the S in many deposits was recognized early on, it was initially envisioned as a diﬀusive process involving incorporation of S released by conversion of pyrite to pyrrhotite (e.g., Naldrett, 1966; Ripley, 1981) and subsequently with more geological and ﬂuid dynamic constraints as a wholesale assimilation process (e.g., Huppert et al. 1984; Lesher et al. 1984). However, it has since been appreciated that diﬀusion rates through wall rocks or xenoliths are much too slow (e.g., Robertson et al., 2015) and that the solubility of sulﬁde is much too low to dissolve the large amounts of sulﬁde in many deposits (0.1–0.3 wt% S in maﬁc-ultramaﬁc magmas: e.g., Haughton et al., 1974; Shima and Naldrett, 1975; Mavrogenes and O'Neill, 1999), so the best model for most deposits is for an immiscible sulﬁde xenomelt to be released by melting wall rocks and upgraded by interaction with the magma (Lesher and Campbell, 1993). Sulfate can also be incorporated (e.g., Jugo et al., 2005), but must be reduced to sulﬁde (see discussion by Naldrett, 2004).
The composition of the sulﬁde xenomelt will vary depending on the nature of the source rock:
1) Sulﬁde facies iron formations (e.g., parts of the Duluth Complex, Forrestania, Shaw Dome) and evaporites (e.g., Noril’sk) normally contain little or no Ni-Cu-PGE or Cu-Zn-Pb
2) S-C-rich pelites/gneisses (e.g., other parts of the Duluth Complex, Raglan, Voisey’s Bay) may contain trace to minor amounts of metals, more often Cu-Zn-Pb than Ni-Co-PGE

3) S-rich volcanic-exhalative rocks may contain signiﬁcant amounts of Cu-Zn-Pb (e.g., Namew Lake: Menard et al., 1996)
4) Maﬁc-ultramaﬁc rocks (e.g., Nipissing, East Bull Lake, and Archean Levack suite maﬁc intrusions at Sudbury) may contain signiﬁcant amounts of Ni-Cu-(PGE)
Once incorporated, chalcophile elements will partition from (or rarely into) the silicate magma into (or rarely from) the sulﬁde xenomelt with the metal content of the ﬁnal sulﬁde melt being controlled by 1) the abundance of metal in the initial sulﬁde xenomelt (Lesher and Burnham, 2001), 2) the abundance of metal in the initial silicate melt, 3) the sulﬁde melt/silicate melt partition coeﬃcient (PGE ⋙ Cu > Ni > Co > Zn > Pb), and 4) the silicate melt/sulﬁde melt mass ratio (R factor) (Campbell and Naldrett, 1979). The abundances of metals and isotope ratios in all components of the system, the ﬁnal sulﬁde melt, the ﬁnal silicate melt, and any residues, xenoliths, xenocrysts, and xenovolatiles will be controlled by the same mass balances (see Lesher and Burnham, 2001). At high R the metal contents of all phases reach maxima/minima (depending on the relative abundances in the initial sulﬁde xenomelt and magma: see Figs. 6 and 7) and record true partition coeﬃcients, whereas at lower R the metal contents of all phases are lower/higher and record only apparent partition coeﬃcients (see Campbell and Barnes, 1984). Similarly, at high R the isotopic ratios of all phases approach the values in the initial magma, whereas at low R the isotopic ratios of all phases approach the values of the contaminants (Figs. 6 and 7). These models apply to batch equilibration or pooled dynamic equilibration. There are models that more closely simulate incremental dynamic upgrading (e.g., Brügmann et al., 1993), but the results are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent except for elements with extremely high partition coeﬃcients (see Naldrett, 2004).

469

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

Fig. 5. 34S/32S isotopic data for selected Ni-Cu-PGE deposits. Data sources: Alexo: Naldrett (1966); Duluth: Mainwaring and Naldrett, 1977; Fortaleza de Minas: Choudhuri et al. (1997); Hart: Hiebert et al. (2016); Kambalda: Donnelly et al. (1978), Seccombe et al. (1981); Langmuir: Green and Naldrett (1981); Noril’sk: Grinenko (1985); Nebo-Babel: Seat et al. (2009); Phoenix-Selkirk and Phikwe-Phokoje-Dikoloti: Fiorentini et al. (2012a); Raglan: Lesher et al. (1999); Thompson: Bleeker (1990); Voisey’s Bay: Ripley et al. (1999); Windarra: Seccombe et al. (1978).

4. Xenoliths
In many deposits (e.g., Duluth, Noril’sk, Sudbury, Voisey’s Bay) xenoliths are closely associated with sulﬁde mineralization. They have traditionally been interpreted to represent wall rocks that contributed S (e.g., Mainwaring and Naldrett, 1977; Ripley, 1981; Thériault and Barnes, 1998; Samalens et al., 2017) and sometimes metals (e.g., Tyson and Chang, 1984), but played mainly a passive role during sulﬁde transport and deposition, reﬂecting hydrodynamic equivalence (e.g., Li and Naldrett, 2000) where less dense but larger silicate xenoliths have similar settling rates as denser but smaller sulﬁde droplets.
However, as we shall see they may have played more active roles by: 1) increasing bulk viscosity, 2) reducing bulk density if less dense than the magma or increasing bulk density if more dense than the magma, and if olivine-rich and if silicate melt can be advected away, 3) providing a medium for sulﬁde melt droplets to nucleate, allowing sulﬁde to be more easily transported upwards. Even if they contain no S, inclusions may contaminate the invading magma, potentially lowering sulﬁde solubility, but because of the limits on the solubility of sulﬁde in magmas noted above and the even greater limits on the changes in solubility with contamination, this normally generates only small amounts of sulﬁdes.
Xenoliths are very rare and occur only along the basal contacts at Kambalda (e.g., Frost and Groves, 1989a), which formed from a very high-T (∼1620 °C) komatiitic magma, although they have been

reported in komatiitic rocks at Digger Rocks (Perring et al., 1995) and Hunters Road (Prendergast, 2001). They are rare and only occur along the basal contact with gabbros (but not metasediments) at Raglan (e.g., Lesher, 2007), which formed from a intermediate-T (∼1360 °C) komatiitic basaltic magma. However, xenoliths are common at Duluth, Noril’sk, and Voisey’s Bay, which formed from lower-T (< 1280 °C) picritic/basaltic magmas and at Sudbury, which formed from a low-T (∼1180 °C at the liquidus) quartz dioritic magma. Several examples are described below.
4.1. Sudbury
Xenoliths are common in both Contact Sublayer (Fig. 8A) and Oﬀset Sublayer (Inclusion-Rich Quartz Diorite) (Fig. 8B) at Sudbury. They range from felsic to ultramaﬁc in composition, but mineralization is more commonly associated with maﬁc-ultramaﬁc inclusions (e.g., Pattison, 1979; Naldrett et al., 1984; Lightfoot et al., 1997; Prevec et al., 2000). The melt sheet at Sudbury has been interpreted by most workers to have been initially superheated (up to 2000 °C: Ivanov and Deutsch, 1999), so the preserved inclusions must have incorporated at a later stage – after earlier inclusions had been digested and cooled the melt sheet closer to the liquidus (∼1180 °C). It is not yet clear how many represent cognate inclusions (Lightfoot et al., 1997; Prevec et al., 2000), xenoliths of local contact rocks (e.g., Pattison, 1979), or exotic xenoliths (e.g., Naldrett et al., 1984), but some exhibit evidence of shock

470

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

Fig. 6. R factor mixing models for Ni-Cu-PGE mineralization at Namew Lake, Manitoba using the model of Lesher and Burnham (2001). Curves are calculated variations with R, assuming 1080 ppm Ni, 65 ppm Cu, 10 ppb Pd, 0.17 ppb Ir, 95 ppm Zn, and 0.23 ppm Pb in the initial komatiitic magma, DNiSul/Sil = 200; DCuSul/Sil = 600, DPdSul/Sil = DIrSul/ Sil = 30,000, DZnSul/Sil = 10, and DPbSul/Sil = 10. Dots are average NL ore compositions (Menard et al., 1996). Ni-Cu-Zn-Pb in ppm, Pd-Ir in ppm. A: Variations assuming no metals in the initial sulﬁde xenomelt. This model accounts for the abundances of Ni-Pd-Ir in the deposit, but does not account for the anomalously high Cu-Zn-Pb abundances in the deposit. B: Variations using same magma but assuming initial sulﬁde xenomelt (volcanicexhalative rocks) contained no Ni, Pd, or Ir, 8.1 wt% Cu, 7.5 wt% Zn, and 0.8 wt% ppm Pb. This model ﬁts the data (RMSD = 1.68) at an R value of 538.
metamorphism (Wang et al., 2016a) and are clearly not cognate, and some contain abundant phlogopite and are clearly exotic (Wang et al., 2016b).
The strong association between ultramaﬁc inclusions, mineralization, and embayments in the contact environments at Sudbury can be explained in two fundamentally diﬀerent ways: 1) a mixture of SIC melt, Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melt precipitated from the overlying melt sheet, and ultramaﬁc inclusions derived from footwall rocks accumulated along the basal contact and was swept into pre-existing embayments by convection currents (e.g., Keays and Lightfoot, 2004) or slumped into the embayments as dense debris ﬂows, and/or 2) all three are the products of local thermomechanical erosion of pre-existing protores in Nipissing, East Bull Lake, and Levack Gneiss suite intrusions. The latter interpretation is supported by the close association between mineralized embayments and maﬁc-ultramaﬁc footwall rocks (Lightfoot, 2016), the compositional similarities2 between Nipissing-hosted Ni-CuPGE ores (see data in Sproule et al., 2008) and average Sudbury ores (see data in Lightfoot, 2016), systematic variations in Pb isotopic compositions (see data and discussion by McNamara et al., 2017), and systematic variations in S isotopic compositions (see data in Ripley et al., 2015).
The strong association between inclusions and mineralization in the subvertical oﬀset dike environments at Sudbury (see review by Lightfoot, 2016) suggests that the inclusions increased the eﬀective viscosity of the quartz dioritic (QD) magma, inhibiting coarse (2–3 cm) disseminated and semi-massive Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melts from settling.
2 Although the quartz dioritic melt contained less Ni and Cu than the Nipissing magma, this would be oﬀset by the higher sulﬁde/silicate partition coeﬃcients expected in a more polymerized quartz dioritic melts (see discussion by Lesher and Arndt, 1995; Lesher and Campbell, 1993). This means that even if magma:sulﬁde ratios (R factors) varied widely, the compositions would not change signiﬁcantly, explaining the relatively narrow ranges of metal tenors in Sudbury contact ores (see Lightfoot, 2016).

Fig. 7. R factor isotopic mixing models for Kambalda, Western Australia (summarized from plots in Lesher and Burnham, 2001). At low R the isotopic values converge to those in the initial sulﬁde xenomelt; at high R the isotopic values converge to those in the mantle-derived magma. Because of diﬀerences in the isotopic ratios and abundances in the diﬀerent systems, they mix along diﬀerent trajectories with γOs isotopes converging to near-mantle values at the lowest R factors, εNd (silicate components) at intermediate R factors, and δ 34S and S/Se converging at the highest R factors. The R factors at Kambalda have been estimated independently to be within the range 100–500 (Lesher and Campbell, 1993).
The absence of inclusions or mineralization in the thin (20 cm – 1 m wide) lateral margins of the dikes (Fig. 8C) and the presence of inclusions of barren QD within IQD (Fig. 8C) suggests two phases of emplacement (Lightfoot et al., 1997). The occurrence of IQD in the interior and only rarely along the margins of the dikes suggest that the interiors must have been mechanically weak and therefore not completely crystallized, implying rapid sequential emplacement of QD and IQD and therefore very rapid achievement of sulﬁde saturation (Lesher, 2013c), not slow exsolution and gravitational settling during cooling of the Main Mass (e.g., Keays and Lightfoot, 2004; Li and Ripley, 2005).
4.2. Voisey’s Bay
The xenoliths at Voisey’s Bay appear be derived from the pelitic paragneiss, enderbitic orthogneiss, and maﬁc to quartzofeldspathic gneiss country rocks, which have been contact metamorphosed and partially melted by the magma: garnet oxidized to hercynite and magnetite, adding Si to the magma; cordierite dehydrated to hercynite, adding Si to the magma; hypersthene and K-feldspar reacted to produce hercynite, adding of Si and K to the magma; plagioclase broke down to corundum, adding Si and Na to the magma; and corundum reacted with Fe and Mg in the magma to form additional hercynite (Li and Naldrett, 2000; Mariga et al., 2006). This increased the density of the inclusions, explaining the close association between the inclusions and sulﬁde ores (Naldrett, 1966). Some are plagioclase-rich (S.J. Barnes, pers. comm., 2017), but are not concentrated in the upper parts of the chambers so were likely still denser than the magma or trapped by the sulﬁde melt before they could segregate (see Discussion below). This made the sulﬁde-xenolith mixture even denser than the maﬁc magma and less likely that the inclusions and sulﬁdes moved upwards through the system (cf. Lightfoot et al., 2012) and more likely that they settled backwards in the system (see Discussion below and Barnes et al., 2017).
4.3. Black Label hybrid zone
The Blackbird – Black Thor Igneous Complex (BTIC; also known as the “Double Eagle Complex) in the McFaulds Lake Greenstone Belt of northern Ontario contains signiﬁcant Ni-Cu-PGE mineralization within footwall feeder dikes/sills at Eagle’s Nest (Mungall et al., 2010) and Bluejay (formerly AT-12), and minor low-grade mineralization within cognate breccias along the periphery of a late websterite phase emplaced into the Black Label chromite zone (Farhangi et al., 2013; Spath et al., 2015; Spath, 2017). The spatial association and textures indicate

471

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

Fig. 8. A: Photograph of Contact Sublayer/Granite Breccia contact, Whistle Embayment, Sudbury Photograph of inclusion-rich Contact Sublayer, Whistle Embayment, Sudbury. B: Closeup of Contact Sublayer in central part of A showing rounded maﬁc-ultramaﬁc clasts and disseminated Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁdes. Lens cap is 76 mm in diameter. C: Photograph of western part of Trill Oﬀset Dike. Sudbury (photo by L-M Klimesh) showing mineralized inclusion quartz diorite (IQD) core and unmineralized inclusion-free quartz diorite (QD) margin. Backpack is ∼60 cm long. D: Contact further east in Trill Oﬀset Dike showing sharp transgressive contact between barren QD (upper part) and weakly mineralized IQD (lower part) containing inclusions of QD and felsic country rocks. Coin is 28 mm in diameter.

that the mineralization formed by reaction of the late websterite magma with previously crystallized parts of the BTIC. Although there are many examples where minor amounts of Ni-Cu-PGE mineralization are associated with breccias and/or partial melts along the margins of maﬁc-ultramaﬁc intrusions (e.g., East Bull Lake: Peck et al., 2001; Platreef: Kinnaird et al., 2005; River Valley: Holwell et al., 2014), this is the ﬁrst case known to me where Ni-Cu-PGE sulﬁde mineralization – albeit small amounts with low grades – has formed through interaction of a magma with cognate xenoliths.
5. Silicate xenomelts
Silicate xenomelts are rarely preserved, because they are normally miscible in the lava/magma and are easily assimilated in dynamic systems, but they have been preserved in a few localities, including:
1) Xenomelts of sediments preserved as ocellar rocks in the upper parts of ﬂanking sheet-ﬂow facies at Foster Shoot, Kambalda (e.g., Frost and Groves, 1989b). They are depleted in S and metals, which appear to have been sequestered by the complementary sulﬁde xenomelts (Fig. 4).
2) Xenomelts of argillites within massive ores at Noril’sk (Fig. 3K) 3) Xenomelts of felsic volcanic rocks preserved as diapirs and ﬁlms
along the lower contacts of the host units at Silver Swan (Dowling et al., 2004). 4) Xenomelts of gabbros preserved along the margins of xenoliths and as ﬁlms along the lower contact at Katinniq (Fig. 3L-M). 5) Xenomelts of basalts preserved as accumulations along the basal sulﬁde-basalt contact and along the upper margins of ore pinchouts at Kambalda (see Frost and Groves, 1989; Staude et al., 2016, 2017).
The Duluth Complex contains numerous iron oxide-rich dikes, sills,

pods, and, pipelike bodies (e.g., Mainwaring and Naldrett, 1977; Ripley et al., 1998). Ripley et al. (1998) suggested that the oxide-apatite-rich rocks were the products of liquid immiscibility, but it is possible that the iron oxide-rich bodies represent the residues (liquids and/or solids) of partial melting of Biwabik Iron Formation with Ti partitioning into the oxide-rich residue and contamination triggering apatite saturation. The present distribution of sulﬁde and oxide deposits in the lower part of the Duluth Complex does not correspond to their proximities to Srich Virginia Formation or Fe-rich Biwabik Iron Formation (see Ripley et al., 1998), but the two mineralization types are strongly segregated along strike (Cu-Ni-PGE to the north, Fe-Ti oxide to the south), so it seems possible that they represent accumulations from those sources but that the current erosional section does not reﬂect the locations of those sources during incorporation (i.e., that the contact geometry is misleading and/or that further erosion has modiﬁed the location of the contact).
6. Xenocrysts
Xenocrysts appear to be less often preserved (or recognized), but chromite and olivine xenocrysts are present in the Black Thor Igneous Complex (Spath et al., 2015; Spath, 2017), garnet xenocrysts are preserved at Savannah (S.J. Barnes, pers. comm., 2017), and quartz and plagioclase xenocrysts are preserved at Nebo-Babel (Seat et al., 2007).
As noted above, the abundant chromite in the Black Thor Igneous Complex has been interpreted to represent xenocrystic magnetite that has been converted to chromite by interaction with the Cr-rich parental komatiitic magma (Fig. 9). If this interpretation is correct, the model may apply to varying degrees to other chromite deposits that are hosted in magmatic conduits (e.g., Inyala, Ipueira-Medrado, Kemi, Nkomati, or Sukinda) and explain why the chromite horizons in those deposits are so thick.

472

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Fig. 9. Schematic model for dynamic upgrading of iron-formation magnetite (or ilmenomagnetite from gabbro) to chromite (Lesher et al., 2014, submitted).

7. Xenovolatiles
The S sources at some Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits (e.g., Jinchuan, Sudbury, Thompson, Voisey’s Bay) were consolidated and more-or-less anhydrous at the time of incorporation and the ores in those localities do not appear to contain any vesicles or amygdales (Fig. 10A-B).
However, the S sources at other Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits (e.g., AlexoDundonald, Kambalda, Noril’sk, Pechenga, Raglan) were unconsolidated at the time of incorporation and these ores are locally vesicular/amygdaloidal (Fig. 10C; see review by Barnes et al., 2017). Ore formation involving unconsolidated sediments and volcaniclastic rocks would have been very dynamic, as they were ﬂuidized and/or volatilized, aiding mechanical erosion and facilitating assimilation (e.g., Williams et al., 1998, 2002; Le Vaillant et al., 2017), and ultimately partially melted and devolatilized, producing sulﬁde xenomelts and supercritical xenoﬂuid/gas bubbles.
8. Residues and skarns
Although the wall rocks bordering magmatic ore deposits are commonly contact metamorphosed and sometimes partially melted (e.g., Alexo: Houlé et al., 2012; Kambalda: Frost and Groves, 1989a; Staude et al., 2016, 2017; Noril’sk: e.g., Naldrett, 2004; Raglan: Lesher, 2007; Sudbury: e.g., McCormick et al., 2002), residues of devolatilization/partial melting/reaction appear to be less well preserved.
Because the rate thermomechanical erosion of wall rocks and inclusions is much faster than the rate of heat conduction (see discussion by Huppert et al., 1984; Williams et al., 1998), the rocks or parts of an inclusion adjacent to an actively eroding contact will remain at moreor-less ambient conditions until eroded. Only after erosion ceases – due to temperature or magma dynamics – will the thermal aureole expand in thickness. With all else equal a contact metamorphic aureole adjacent to a body emplaced into more rapidly-cooled volcanic environment will be narrower than an aureole adjacent to a body emplaced into a more slowly-cooled subvolcanic or plutonic environment, and the aureole adjacent to thicker body will be wider than the aureole adjacent to a thinner body, but the nature of the wall rocks is equally important. This explains the diﬀerences between the very thick aureoles at Sudbury (2-pyroxene hornfels in basalts up to 750m from the contact from the 2–3 km-thick melt sheet), the thick aureoles at Noril’sk (metasomatic zones up to 300 m wide in argillites and evaporates adjacent to < 300 m-thick intrusions), the thin aureoles at Raglan (biotite in semi-pelites up to 10 m below 200 m-thick lava channels), and the very thin aureoles at Kambalda (negligible contact metamorphism in basalts beneath 30-100m thick lava channels).

Three examples are described here: 1) residues at Kambalda, 2) contact metamorphosed footwall rocks at Raglan, and 3) skarns at Sudbury.
9. Kambalda residues
The residues of devolatilization of cherty sulﬁdic sediments at Kambalda occur as chlorite- and sulﬁde-rich metasediments on the mid-proximal parts of the contacts ﬂanking the ore-localizing embayments that are depleted in Na ≫ Ti ∼ Sr ∼ Al ∼ Y > Zr ∼ Si ∼ U > Th > P and enriched in Cr < Mg < Zn < Ca < Ir ∼ Pd ∼ Fe ∼ Ni < Mn < Co < S ∼ Cu < Au relative to precursor sediments. Bavinton (1981) interpreted them to be primary sedimentary rocks that contained less felsic components and more basaltic components, but Lesher and Burnham (2001) interpreted them as devolatilized cherty sulﬁdic metasediments based on their similar refractory lithophile element ratios and their intermediate position ﬂanking the main lava channels – between a more proximal zone where only a thin (∼10–20 cm) zone of massive chlorite is preserved and a more distal zone where contact sediments are preserved (Fig. 2). Their geochemical characteristics, including metal contents (Fig. 4), and mass balance constraints (see discussion in Lesher and Burnham, 2001), suggest that they represent more refractory maﬁc components after removal of less refractory felsic components, presumably represented by rare felsic ocellites (Frost and Groves, 1989b). Staude et al. (2017) describe cm-scale layer-speciﬁc melting of the contact sediment at Moran Shoot by inﬁltrating sulﬁde where the cherty layers did not melt and the aluminous layers melted completely to form melt emulsions with the sulﬁde, but only within mm of the contact. The degree of melting clearly varied with the thermal history of the lava channel and the composition of the sediment.
The presence of pyrrhotite in devolatilized chlorite-rich sediments directly beneath the lavas at Kambalda (Fig. 3D) and in metamorphosed xenoliths in other deposits (e.g., Duluth, Voisey’s Bay), indicates that it was more stable than some of the felsic components during contact metamorphism. Pure Fe1-XS melts at ∼1190 °C, higher than the melting point of wet felsic components. (Fe, Ni, Cu)1−X S melts at temperatures as low as ∼900 °C (e.g., Kullerud et al., 1969). Solid-state diﬀusion rates are generally much slower than melting rates (see discussion by Robertson et al., 2015), so even if pyrrhotite was incorporated into the magma where Ni-Cu would be able to diﬀuse into the margins of the clasts, this would occur at rates much slower than melting. As noted above in some deposits the sulﬁde that was incorporated contained signiﬁcant amounts of Cu-Zn-Pb (e.g., Namew Lake) or Ni-Cu (e.g., Sudbury) and would have melted at lower temperatures.

473

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Fig. 10. A: Coarse (2–3 cm) disseminated Po-Pn-Ccp droplets in quartz diorite, Copper Cliﬀ North Mine, Sudbury. Note absence of any associated silicate melt or former volatile components. B: Intermediate-sized (1–2 cm) composite sulﬁde-silicate droplets in net-textured ore, Katinniq deposit, Raglan. Silicate caps are igneous pyroxene and chlorite after komatiitic melt, not secondary phases ﬁlling vesicles. Lower margins conform to underlying olivine (now serpentine-magnetite), indicating some settling. C and D: Coarse (up to 3 cm), slightly ﬂattened composite sulﬁdesilicate globules in varitextured “taxitic” gabbro, Bear’s Brook open pit, Noril’sk I mine. Note light-green to grey chalcedonic upper parts of many globules, which is a secondary vesicle ﬁlling. E: Analogous composite sulﬁde-vapor bubble at the top of an experimental capsule (Mungall et al., 2015).

9.1. Raglan footwall rocks
The footwall rocks at Raglan include metapelites and metagabbros (see review by Lesher, 2007). The metapelites provide the best information regarding thermal gradients: they are strongly recrystallized and metasomatized to ﬁne-grained massive light green granofels within 1m of the contact (Fig. 3E-F), metamorphosed to white and brown spotted biotite hornfels 1–5 m from the contact (i.e., higher T than the

ambient chlorite zone lower greenschist facies metamorphism) (Fig. 3G-H), and are virtually unhornfelsed black graphitic-sulﬁdic slates > 10 m from the contact (Fig. 3I-J). The proximal granofels facies is so massive and so strongly recrystallized that it was mapped by some early workers as basalt. The bleaching is similar to that observed at Alexo (Houlé et al., 2012) and Sothman (Houlé and Lesher, 2011), and has been interpreted to reﬂect ponding of hot ﬂuids released from unconsolidated to semi-consolidated sediments (Raglan) and porous

474

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Fig. 11. A: Photograph of mine face containing a massive sulﬁde vein in Sudbury breccia (pseudotachylitic Levack Gneiss) grading from chalcopyrite-pentlandite into a bornite-millerite, McCreedy East 153 deposit, Sudbury. B: Photograph of the margin of a footwall Fe-Cu-Ni sulﬁde vein, McCreedy East 153 ore body, Sudbury. Note very thin alteration selvedge and thick margin of skeletal magmatic magnetite. C: Photomicrograph of similar margin in same area showing actinolite and pyrosmalite (analysis: Fe7.9 Mg0.09 Mn0.03 Si6.3 O15 (OH)13) – interpreted to be a pseudomorphous after pyroxene – along the margin. D: Density-weighted enrichment-depletion diagram showing mass changes between two alteration selvedges in the same area. B-D from Raskevicius (2013).

volcanic rocks (Alexo, Sothman) beneath the host units. In all of these cases, the degree of metamorphism is greater around the embayments, suggesting that this is related to lava channelization, not simply postmagmatic contact metamorphism, which would have progressed much more slowly (see discussion by Robertson et al., 2015). The key could have been ﬂuids ponded beneath the submarine lava channels, which

could have permitted heat to be conducted much more rapidly than through dry rocks – allowing the footwall rocks to “stew” in their own juices.

475

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

9.2. Sudbury skarns
Thin (1–3 cm) actinolite-magnetite-sulﬁde selvedges bordering footwall Fe-Cu-Ni sulﬁde veins at Sudbury (Fig. 11A-B) have historically been interpreted to be hydrothermal/metamorphic reaction zones (e.g., Farrow and Watkinson, 1997), but Nelles (2012) and Raskevicius (2013) interpreted them as reaction skarns between Fe-Cu-Ni sulﬁde melt and felsic wall rocks (in most cases impact-generated pseudotachylitic breccias derived from Levack Gneiss). Density-weighed mass balance calculations (Fig. 11C) indicate the major change is the transfer of Fe from the sulﬁde melt into the wall rock.
The signiﬁcance of this to ore genesis is that the vein systems are zoned from chalcopyrite – pyrrhotite – pentlandite proximal parts to bornite ± millerite-rich peripheral parts. This is commonly interpreted to represent hydrothermal mobilization from the contact ores (e.g., Farrow and Watkinson, 1997), but there are many problems with such an interpretation:
1) The selvedges are too narrow to represent ﬂuid-rock interaction by the very large amount of ﬂuid that would be required to transport and deposit such large amounts of Fe-Cu-Ni sulﬁdes.
2) Fe is normally much more soluble in hydrothermal ﬂuids than Cu and considerably more soluble than Ni in the absence of As (which is only a trace component on the North Range). Although there are some Fe-Cu sulﬁdes in the selvedges and surrounding wall rocks, the abundances are very much lower than in deposits known to have been deposited from hydrothermal ﬂuids (e.g., VMS and porphyry Cu deposits).
3) Much of the vein mineralization contains small but signiﬁcant amounts of Ir, whereas Ir is below detection limits in unequivocal hydrothermal Fe-Cu-Ni sulﬁdes (e.g., Lesher and Keays, 1984).
4) Experimentally-determined phase equilibria in the Fe-Cu-S (Fig. 12A) and Fe-Ni-S systems (see review by Naldrett, 2004) indicate that there is a thermal minimum near the composition of ISS and do not permit formation of signiﬁcant amounts of bornite ± millerite-rich along normal liquid lines of descent.
The best interpretation is that reaction of Fe-Cu-Ni sulﬁde melt with the felsic wall rocks and loss of Fe drove the liquid into primary phase volumes of bornite solid solution and/or millerite (Fig. 12B).
10. Discussion
The three most important constraints on the role of xenophases in the genesis of Ni-Cu-PGE mineralization are 1) the viscosity of the silicate magma, 2) their survival times, and 3) their inﬂuence on the transport of dense sulﬁde melts and/or oxides.
10.1. Viscosity
The ascent rates of basaltic and ultramaﬁc magma are controlled mainly by density contrasts with the wall rocks and magma viscosity. Whereas the densities of anhydrous basaltic and ultramaﬁc magmas vary narrowly within the range 2.7–2.8 g m−3, viscosities range more widely within the range 1–1000 g cm−1 s−1 and even higher if the abundances of xenophases are high enough to increase their eﬀective viscosities. There are many formulations (see review by Petford, 2009), but assuming spherical particles and hexagonal-closest packing (Shaw, 1972) viscosity increases one order of magnitude with ∼45% xenoliths/xenocrysts, two orders of magnitude with ∼62% xenoliths/xenocrysts, three orders of magnitude with ∼69% xenocrysts, four orders of magnitude with ∼72% xenoliths/xenocrysts, and reaching inﬁnite viscosity at ∼74% xenoliths/xenocrysts. As a consequence, xenocryst/ xenocryst-rich magmas may ascend slowly even if the xenocrysts/xenoliths are less dense than the magma.
However, viscosity also inﬂuences the sinking/ﬂoating velocities of

Fig. 12. A: Phase diagram at 800 °C in the Fe-Cu-S system (redrawn from Tsujimura and Kitakaze, 2004). BnSS: bornite solid solution, MSS: monosulﬁde solid solution (pyrrhotite solid solution), ISS: intermediate solid solution, Liq: Fe-Cu-S liquid, P: peritectic, E: eutectic. Note that the liquid ﬁeld represents the thermal minimum in this system and that it lies between MSS – ISS and BnSS. A sulﬁde liquid with a composition similar to unfractionated Sudbury contact ores would contain ∼5% Cu and would fractionate MSS and then ISS, not reaching the ﬁeld where BnSS would crystallize. Removing Fe (in magnetite and Fe-rich silicates) would drive it toward the ﬁeld where BnSS would crystallize. B: Schematic section between Cu5FeS4 (bornite solid solution) and FeS (MSS) (from Nelles and Lesher, in revision), showing the trajectory of the sulﬁde melt during crystallization of MSS and ISS, and the eﬀect of removing Fe in magnetite and Fe-silicates. L1: initial sulﬁde melt, M1: MSS in equilibrium with L1, L2: sulﬁde melt at MSS-ISS peritectic P, M2: MSS in equilibrium with L2, I2: ISS in equilibrium with L2, L3: sulﬁde melt at eutectic E, I3: ISS in equilibrium with L3.
xenophases. The very high eﬀective viscosities of congested suspensions is one of the explanations for why there is so little segregation of less dense xenoliths/xenocrysts from much denser sulﬁde melts in most magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) systems, when they should ﬂoat quite rapidly (Fig. 13).
10.2. Survival time
A critical issue regarding the ability of xenophases to play a role in ore formation is their survival time.
10.2.1. Sulﬁde xenomelts The survival time of sulﬁde xenomelts depends on the solubility of
sulﬁde, which varies with temperature, pressure, and magma

476

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Fig. 13. Maximum settling velocities (estimated using Stokes Law) for chromite, sulﬁde melt, olivine, maﬁc xenoliths, maﬁc xenoliths with 10% sulﬁde melt, felsic xenoliths, and felsic xenoliths with 10% sulﬁde melt compared to typical magma ascent velocities (100–1000 cm s−1). Boxes show settling rates for common grain/droplet/xenolith sizes. Magma density assumed to be 2.7 g cm−3 and magma viscosity assumed to be 100 g cm−1 s−1.

composition. Decreasing pressure will increase solubility, decreasing temperature will decrease solubility, and contamination often decreases sulﬁde solubility (e.g., Haughton et al., 1974; Shima and Naldrett, 1975; Wendlandt, 1982; Mavrogenes and O'Neill, 1999). However, because the solubility of sulﬁde in silicate magmas is so low, these effects are minor in high-sulﬁde Ni-Cu-PGE systems. Only at high magma:sulﬁde ratios in dynamic systems being replenished by magmas that are undersaturated in sulﬁde – more likely in komatiitic magmas than in basaltic magmas – will signiﬁcant amounts of sulﬁde xenomelts be consumed (Lesher and Burnham, 2001; see also Kerr and Leitch, 2005).
10.2.2. Silicate xenomelts The survival time of silicate xenomelts can be expected to be rela-
tively short, as they are normally miscible in the silicate magma. In many deposits (e.g., Kambalda, Noril’sk, Raglan, Silver Swan) they are preserved at or near the base of the massive ore horizon, but represent the last material to be melted. At Kambalda – the only clear example – do they appear to have been preserved in ﬂanking sheet-ﬂow facies, where ﬂow was likely less turbulent, not in channel-ﬂow facies, where ﬂow was likely more turbulent.

10.2.3. Xenoliths Xenoliths may be partly or completely consumed by a magma
through reaction, devolatilization, melting, and/or dissolution (e.g., Tsuchiyama, 1986). Devolatilization and melting may occur within the xenolith, so are therefore faster and more eﬃcient, but reaction and dissolution only occur along the margins, so are inherently slower and less eﬃcient (see Robertson et al., 2015). Considering mainly melting, the survival time of xenoliths will depend on several factors (e.g., Bowen, 1922; McLeod and Sparks, 1998):
1) Temperature, viscosity, and density of the magma 2) Initial temperature, mineralogical composition, texture, and density
of the xenolith 3) Viscosity and density of any melt/partial melt (mush) layer 4) Solubilities of the various components in the magma 5) Fluid dynamic regime (laminar vs. transitional vs. turbulent)
Xenoliths are less likely to be preserved in hotter, lower viscosity komatiitic magmas than in cooler more viscous basaltic and picritic magmas, and in more dynamic (more turbulent) systems (or parts of systems) than in less dynamic (less turbulent) systems. Maﬁc lithologies are more refractory, but can melt more rapidly than silicic compositions

477

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

because their lower melt viscosities result in thinner melt/mush layers and higher heat ﬂuxes (McLeod and Sparks, 1998). Water-saturated lithologies can melt faster, because of lower melting temperatures and lower melt viscosities. Xenoliths of common continental crustal lithologies in common magmas have been predicted to melt at rates of the order of 2 mm h−1 ∼ 5 cm d−1, and xenoliths of hot lower continental crustal granulites in basaltic magma have been predicted to melt at rates of the order of 17 mm h−1 ∼ 40 cm d−1 (McLeod and Sparks, 1998). Depending on the relative ascent/settling velocities of the xenoliths, the survival time of all but very large blocks can be relatively short, explaining why many mineralized bodies contain few if any xenoliths and why, where present, they are much more common along the margins rather than the interiors of magmatic bodies.
This means that the abundances and densities of xenoliths may change with time, depending on the temperature and ﬂuid dynamic regime of the lava/magma, the mechanical state of the protolith, and time. For example, during waxing phases of lava/magma ﬂow, xenoliths may be more rapidly incorporated and assimilated, whereas during waning phases of lava/magma ﬂow, xenoliths may be less rapidly incorporated and assimilated. Further, as a xenolith is incorporated it will, depending on its composition and texture, modally or incongruently melt (see e.g., Ripley and Alawi, 1988; Samalens et al., 2017), which will normally (albeit not always) increase its density but which may also reduce its size and/or induce fragmentation. Felsic xenoliths incorporated at depth will progressively become metamorphosed, partially melt, and normally (but again not always) become denser. Maﬁc melts generally increase in density as they crystallize plagioclase and accumulate Fe-Ti. Assimilation of felsic components, which typically have partial molar volumes less than the corresponding solid phases of inclusions, will partially oﬀset this increase, but in the dynamic systems that form magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits it will be the presence of xenoliths that will have the greatest inﬂuence on bulk magma density.
Xenoliths may also be inﬁltrated by the host magma. Many ultramaﬁc inclusions in the Contact Sublayer at Sudbury, even those that are clearly exotic, have highly incompatible and moderately incompatible lithophile element geochemical patterns that are more-or-less identical to the host magma (e.g., Lightfoot et al., 1997). This has been used as evidence for a cognate origin, but where the inclusions are clearly not cognate (e.g., because they contain textures associated with shock metamorphism and/or abundant phlogopite, which is only a minor phase in the rest of the rocks) it must record cryptic melt inﬁltration that overwhelms the abundance of trace elements in the mesocumulateadcumulate inclusions. However, this will rarely aﬀect the physical properties, as inﬁltration of signiﬁcant amounts of melt normally results in disaggregation.
10.2.4. Xenocrysts Xenocrysts may also react, devolatilize, melt, and/or dissolve with
the magma. Whether residual/cognate xenocrysts are preserved/generated or not depends on the composition of the magma, the composition of the precursor xenolith, and the dynamics of the system (e.g., Bowen, 1922; McLeod and Sparks, 1998). If the xenolith is less maﬁc than the xenolith, it may dissolve or partially melt – congruently or incongruently – and will be less likely to leave residual xenocrysts or to generate cognate xenocrysts. If the xenolith is more maﬁc than the magma, it may react with the magma to and will be more likely to produce residual or cognate xenocrysts.
10.3. Implications for the transport of sulﬁde melts
Sulﬁde melts can be physically transported in lava/magmas in several ways:
1) Dilute (≤10–15%) suspensions of small (< 1 cm) droplets (e.g., Lesher and Groves, 1986; de Bremond d’Ars et al., 2001) where coalescence is inhibited by the small sizes of the droplets and/or

breakup during turbulent ﬂow (Robertson et al., 2016). Coarser droplets will be more susceptible to coalescence and more likely settle depending on magma ascent rates (Fig. 13). The solubility of S at sulﬁde saturation increases with decreasing pressure (e.g., Wendlandt, 1982; Mavrogenes and O'Neill, 1999), resulting in dissolution of sulﬁde, but dissolution is slow relative to magma ascent rates (Robertson et al., 2015) and the change – of the order of 0.04% S (∼0.1% sulﬁde) between 30 kb and the surface – is only signiﬁcant when considering physical transport of very small concentrations of sulﬁdes. 2) Greater abundances and/or coarser droplets in suspension with xenoliths/xenocrysts/xenovolatiles: a) If the xenoliths/xenocrysts are less dense than the magma this
will facilitate upward transport of sulﬁdes (Fig. 13), however, if the xenoliths/xenocrysts are more dense than the magma, they will facilitate downward transport (Fig. 13). Piña et al. (2006) suggested that the high density of the sulﬁde-rich magma helped entrain the inclusions at Aguablanca, but the reverse is also likely true: that the inclusions facilitated upward transport of dense sulﬁde. b) Sulﬁde melts can wet olivine under high fO2 conditions (e.g., Rose and Brenan, 2001) and to a lesser degree pyroxene, but at most localities sulﬁdes do not appear to wet silicate inclusions. Normally only where sulﬁde is the continuous phase – as in semimassive ores - does sulﬁde wet silicate inclusions. This is because the presence of silicate melt inhibits wetting by sulﬁde (see Mungall and Su, 2005), which suggests that it is unlikely that silicate xenoliths can transport attached sulﬁde melts unless they are composed primarily of olivine and unless the fO2 is high. c) Xenovolatiles are always much less dense that the magma, so vesicles will always enhance upward transport and/or retard downward transport (Eckstrand and Williamson, 1985; Ripley et al., 1998; Mungall et al., 2015; Fig. 14). 3) Magmas containing greater than ∼8% chromite or ∼15% sulﬁde will be denser than surrounding crust (Fig. 14) and will be more susceptible to “ﬂooding”, where the continuous phase changes from less dense silicate magma containing sulﬁde droplets to denser sulﬁde magma containing silicate droplets and/or inclusions, resulting in countercurrent (backwards/downwards) ﬂow of the sulﬁde-rich phase (Fig. 15). Thus, it does not seem likely that chromite or sulﬁdes can be transported as very dense semi-massive to massive slugs, unless emplaced very rapidly through seismic pumping (e.g., Maier et al., 2016) or graben collapse, but even in those situations it
Fig. 14. A (top): Plot of bulk magma density vs sulﬁde and chromite content. For a bulk crustal density of 2.9 g cm−3 the maximum sulﬁde content for dispersed buoyant magma transport is ∼13% and that the maximum sulﬁde content for dispersed buoyant magma transport is ∼13%. B (bottom): Plot of bulk magma density vs vesicle and sulﬁde content. For a magma density of 2.7 g cm−3 the maximum sulﬁde content for transport by vesicles is ∼53%.

478

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Fig. 15. Flow patterns in vertical, subvertical, and inclined countercurrent ﬂow (modiﬁed from Ullmann et al., 2003).

has not been demonstrated that the physics permits dense sulﬁde melts to be transported upward for signiﬁcant distances. Tectonic pumping (e.g., Papunen, 2003) is likely too slow. These models require further testing.
The residence time of inclusions also inﬂuences sulﬁde transport:
1) Deeper crustal xenoliths, which might have aided transport by reducing the bulk densities of maﬁc-ultramaﬁc magmas, may not survive and might only be detected afterwards by their inﬂuence on the composition of the magma as it dissolves the inclusions. Because the densities of silicate melts are normally ∼0.1–0.2 g cm−3 less than corresponding solids, melting xenoliths will further decrease the bulk density of the magma, but this will be normally be oﬀset by the crystallization that normally accompanies assimilation (e.g., Bowen, 1922; DePaolo, 1981).
2) Felsic xenoliths incorporated at depth may initially facilitate upward sulﬁde transport by reducing the bulk density of the lava/ magma, but over time as they become metamorphosed, partially melt, and become denser, this will retard upward transport and facilitate sulﬁde deposition or downward transport.
3) Local xenoliths, which also might have contributed S, may be preserved as their residence time will be shorter, but may not have much inﬂuence on sulﬁde transport except to help retard sulﬁde (if less dense than the magma) or to increase (if more dense than the magma) settling of sulﬁde.
Although it is theoretically possible for small amounts of sulﬁdes to be “drawn up” after having accumulated at the base of an intrusion (see discussion by Saumur et al., 2015a), the absence of Ni-Cu-(PGE) mineralization in lavas above mineralized sills (e.g., Noril’sk-Talnakh, Duluth) except where there is evidence of incorporation of S at that level (e.g., Raglan), provides strong support for the concept that signiﬁcant amounts of sulﬁdes cannot be transported upwards. Indeed, there is an increasing appreciation that sulﬁdes are more likely to ﬂow downward than upward in magmatic systems (e.g., Lesher, 2009; Arndt et al., 2013; Lesher, 2013a,b; Barnes et al., 2016; Saumur et al., 2015b; Hughes et al., 2016).
10.4. Ore localization
Most massive to semi-massive Ni-Cu-PGE and some massive to semimassive Cr mineralization is localized within dynamic magmatic systems (e.g., Lesher et al., 1984; Lesher, 1989; Naldrett, 2004, 2011; Arndt et al., 2005; Barnes and Lightfoot, 2005; Ripley and Li, 2011;

Barnes et al., 2016; Lesher et al., submitted), and more speciﬁcally within particular parts of those systems (Fig. 16):
1) Embayments beneath lava channels and channelized sheet ﬂows, of which there are two types: a) Linear embayments in which lava/magma and sulﬁdes ﬂowed along their length (e.g., Alexo: Houlé and Lesher, 2011; most parts of Kambalda: e.g., Gresham and Loftus-Hills, 1981; Lesher, 1989) b) Elliptical to irregular embayments in which sulﬁdes accumulated (e.g., some parts of Kambalda: Lesher, 1989; Langmuir: Green and Naldrett, 1981; Raglan: Lesher, 2007: Sudbury contact ores: Lightfoot, 2016)
2) Widened parts of dikes and step-overs in dikes (e.g., Sudbury oﬀset ores: e.g., Farrow and Lightfoot, 2002; Lightfoot, 2016; parts of Voisey’s Bay: Evans-Lamswood et al., 2000; Lightfoot and EvansLamswood, 2015; Saumur et al., 2015)
3) Throats of magma conduits (e.g., Eagle: Ding et al., 2010; Jingbulake: Yang et al., 2012, Tamarack: Taranovic et al., 2016; other parts of Voisey’s Bay: Evans-Lamswood et al., 2000)
4) Subhorizontal parts of dike-chonolith and dike-sill complexes (e.g., Noril’sk: e.g., Naldrett, 2004; South Raglan: Mungall, 2007; Thompson: e.g., Layton-Matthews et al., 2010)
Although there were undoubtedly secondary topographic features that inﬂuenced the localization of mineralization along the lengths of linear embayments, many Kambalda ore shoots appear to have originally extended over signiﬁcant distances, so the localization appears to have been controlled primarily by gravitational ﬂow segregation rather than abrupt ﬂuid dynamic changes.
The other ore-localizing features have been interpreted to represent places where ﬂuid dynamic conditions abruptly changed, facilitating deposition of dense sulﬁde, chromite, and/or xenoliths. In these cases, the ore-localizing features are interpreted to have operated as reverse venturis (nozzles) in various orientations (subvertical in Fig. 17), where conservation of mass dictates:
Q = pe ue Ae = pc uc Ac = px ux Ax
where Q is mass ﬂow rate, pe, pc, and px are bulk densities, ue, uc, and ux are velocities, and ue, uc, and ux are cross-sectional areas for a narrow entry feeder e, a wider ore-localizing conduit/chamber c, and a narrow exit feeder x.
Continuity requires that at constant Q, increasing Ac (i.e., unconstricting ﬂow) leads to a decrease in uc. Flow velocities are higher in the entry and exit feeders, lower in a narrow chamber, and much lower

479

C.M. Lesher

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Fig. 16. Schematic representations of ore-localizing mechanisms for Ni-Cu-PGE and Cr deposits. Yellow: footwall rocks, blue: seawater or hanging wall rocks, green: magma. A: Longitudinal section through a dynamic (ﬂow-through) submarine lava channel or channelized sill/ chonolith eroding a S-rich substrate and generating sulﬁde xenomelt. B: Longitudinal section through a dynamic submarine lava channel or channelized sill/chonolith containing a second-order embayment that collects sulﬁde xenomelt. C: Cross/longitudinal section through a dynamic channelized sill/chonolith containing a second-order embayment with sulﬁde xenomelt ± inclusions concentrated near the entry point. D: Cross/longitudinal section through a dynamic channelized sill/chonolith containing a “ﬁlter bed” of olivine cumulates ± inclusions that have collected and accumulated ﬁne disseminated sulﬁdes. E: Cross/longitudinal section through a dynamic channelized sill/chonolith containing olivine-(sulﬁde) “cotectic” cumulates.

in a wider chamber (Fig. 17A-B), favouring deposition of denser components (sulﬁde melt, chromite, and/or inclusions) (Fig. 17C). This may become a self-perpetuating process as the magma continues to stope the wall rocks in the chamber more rapidly than the wall rocks of the entry and exit dikes/sills. A consequence of such a process is that deposition of dense sulﬁde melt, chromite, and/or xenoliths within the conduit/ chamber will be accompanied by a reduction in px and therefore with all else equal a corresponding increase in ux.
Many models (e.g., Mungall and Su, 2005; Chung and Mungall, 2009; Barnes et al., 2017a,b) emphasize the eﬀects of surface tension and gravitationally-driven migration/percolation of sulﬁde melt. These are undoubtedly important in modifying disseminated, patchy disseminated, net, and patchy-net textures after deposition, but accumulation of sulﬁde melt in dynamic systems was more likely dominated by channelized advective, often turbulent ﬂow (Fig. 16A-C), intergranular dynamic connectivity (à la Reynolds, 2017) in the case of xenocryst/ phenocryst/primocryst ﬁlter beds (Fig. 16D), and the potential for countercurrent ﬂow of silicate magma and sulﬁde melt and inclusions in the case of inclusion-rich ores.
Indeed, within the context of the constraints on S sources and the complexities of transporting dense sulﬁdes/oxides noted above, it seems likely that the sulﬁdes/oxides in many systems ﬂowed/settled downward and were trapped in the same throats/transitions that have been proposed to have trapped upward-transported sulﬁdes (Fig. 17C-

D). For example, Ding et al. (2012) showed that the mass-independent S isotopic data at Eagle required a deeper source and therefore upward transport, most of the data summarized in Fig. 5 and elsewhere suggest local sources and therefore lateral – if any – transport, and Holwell et al. (2012) and Hughes et al. (2016) showed that mass-dependent S isotopic data in West Greenland macrodikes and olivine-rich plugs on Rum required a shallower source and therefore downward transport. More detailed studies of this type are obviously required, but within the context of this discussion it is clear that sulﬁdes/oxides are just as likely to have formed via downward transport than by upward transport, that both may have operated in the same deposit at diﬀerent times, as magma ﬂuxes waxed and waned, and therefore that any of the models in Fig. 17C-E are capable of localizing Ni-Cu-PGE sulﬁdes or chromite.
11. Conclusions
1) Xenoliths, xenocrysts, xenomelts, and xenovolatiles play active and sometimes critical roles in ore genesis and are valuable exploration indicators.
2) Sulﬁde xenomelts are the most common product of the ore-formation process in Ni-Cu-PGE deposits. The metal tenors and isotopic compositions of the ores and other components in the system depend on the initial composition of the sulﬁde xenomelt, the composition of the silicate magma, the sulﬁde/silicate partition

480

C.M. Lesher

A: Flow Velocities in Smaller Chamber
Exit conduit/dike

B: Flow Velocities in Larger Chamber
Exit conduit/dike

C: Upward Transport and Trapping
Magma continues
upward

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484

D: Countercurrent Flow and Trapping
Magma continues
upward

E: Generation In Situ and Trapping
Magma continues
upward

Entry conduit/ dike

Entry conduit/ dike

Magma + inclusions ± xenocrysts ± sulfides

Sulfide-inclusion poor magma

Sulfide-inclusion poor magma

Fig. 17. Sulﬁde collection mechanisms accompanying velocity changes in a magma channel/chonolith/dike segment/magma chamber. A and B: Schematic mass ﬂux/density/velocity model for magma entering through a narrower conduit/dike, passing through a slightly wider (A) and much wider (B) channel/chonolith/dike chamber/magma chamber, and exiting through a narrower conduit/dike. Lengths of arrows are proportional to velocity and distances between ﬂow lines are inversely proportional to velocity. C: Traditional model in which an upward-ascending magma containing inclusions ± xenocrysts ± sulﬁde enters from below and deposits them near the entry point because of the reduction in magma velocity. D and E: Alternative models in which inclusions ± xenocrysts ± sulﬁde are generated above the level of the chamber (D) or within the chamber (E), settle downwards countercurrent to magma ﬂow, and are deposited near the entry point, prevented from setting further by the higher velocity of ﬂow in the entry conduit/dike.

coeﬃcient, and the magma:sulﬁde mass ratio. 3) Silicate xenomelts other than those in emulsion ores are rare, but
potentially quite valuable mineralization indicators, as they will be depleted in chalcophile metals and are direct evidence of the formation of a Ni-Cu-PGE-enriched sulﬁde xenomelt. 4) Xenoliths contribute S and sometimes metals in most Ni-Cu-PGE deposits and strongly inﬂuence the bulk density and viscosity of the magma and therefore sulﬁde transport. Although xenoliths that are lighter than the magma may facilitate upward transport by decreasing bulk density, they normally become denser as they are metamorphosed and partially melted. They can be diagnostic mineralization indicators and provide important constraints on sulﬁde/oxide sources. 5) Xenocrysts appear to be less commonly preserved, but some chromite deposits may represent accumulations of ﬁne Fe ± Ti oxide xenocrysts that have been converted to chromite during transport in Cr-rich magmas. 6) Xenovolatiles are common where lavas/magmas have incorporated unconsolidated sediments and/or volcanic rocks, and because of their very low density have the greatest potential to enhance the upward ascent of dense Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melts. 7) Most magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE deposits and some Cr deposits are localized in dynamic magmatic systems, particularly in embayments/ jogs/throats that represent changes in ﬂuid dynamic regime and which have been interpreted to represent traps for collecting upward-transported sulﬁdes/oxides/xenoliths, but which may equally represent traps for collecting downward-transported sulﬁdes/ oxides/xenoliths.
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported at various stages by grants from the US National Science Foundation, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada Discovery/CRD/IRC programs, the Ontario Geological Survey and Geological Survey of Canada, BHP Billiton Ltd., Cliﬀs Natural Resources Inc., Falconbridge/Xstrata/ Glencore Ltd., Inco/Vale Ltd., Noront Ltd., Outokumpu Ltd., and Western Mining Corporation. I am very grateful to many colleagues for

discussions on these topics, especially Nick Arndt, Sarah-Jane Barnes, Steve Barnes, Marcus Burnham, Ian Campbell, Paul Golightly, David Groves, Michel Houlé, Jon Hronsky, Reid Keays, Ed Pattison, and Ed Ripley, to Steve Barnes and an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments on the original manuscript, and to Franco Pirajno and Marco Fiorentini for editorial assistance.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oregeorev.2017.08.008.
References
Arndt, N.T., Lesher, C.M., Czamanske, G.K., 2005, Mantle-derived magmas and magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits, 100th Anniversary Volume, Society of Economic Geologists, 5–23.
Arndt, N.T., Barnes, S.J., Robertson, J., Lesher, C.M., Cruden, S., 2013. Downward injection of sulﬁde slurries: their role in the formation of Ni sulﬁde deposits, Goldschmidt Conference, Florence. Mineral. Mag. 77 (5), 618.
Bavinton, O.A., 1981. The nature of sulﬁdic sediments at Kambalda and their broad relationships with associated ultramaﬁc rocks and nickel ores. Econ. Geol. 76, 1606–1628.
Barnes, S.-J., Lightfoot, P.C., 2005. Formation of magmatic nickel sulﬁde ore deposits and processes aﬀecting their copper and platinum group element contents. 100th Anniversary Volume, Society of Economic Geologists, 179–214.
Barnes, S.J., Heggie, G.J., Fiorentini, M.L., 2013. Spatial variation in platinum group element concentrations in ore-bearing komatiite at the Long-Victor deposit, Kambalda Dome, Western Australia: enlarging the footprint of nickel sulﬁde orebodies. Econ. Geol. 108, 913–933.
Barnes, S.J., Cruden, A.R., Arndt, N., Saumur, B.M., 2016. The mineral system approach applied to magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE sulphide deposits. Ore Geol. Rev. 76, 296–316.
Barnes, S.J., Mungall, J.E., Le Vaillant, M., Godel, B., Lesher, C.M., Holwell, D., Lightfoot, P.C., Krivolutskaya, N., Wei, B., 2017a. Sulﬁde-silicate textures in magmatic Ni-CuPGE sulﬁde ore deposits: 1. Disseminated and net-textured ores. Am. Mineral. 102 (3), 473–507.
Barnes, S.J., Le Vaillant, M., Lightfoot, P.C., 2017b. Textural development in sulﬁdematrix ore breccias in the Voisey’s Bay Ni-Cu-Co deposit, Labrador, Canada. Ore Geol. Rev this volume.
Bekker, A., Barley, M.E., Fiorentini, M.L., Rouxel, O.J., Rumble, D., Beresford, S.W., 2009. Atmospheric sulfur in Archean komatiite-hosted nickel deposits. Science 326, 1086–1089.
Bleeker, W., 1990. Evolution of the Thompson Nickel Belt and its Nickel Deposits, Manitoba. PhD thesis, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, 400.
Bowen, N.L., 1922. The behavior of inclusions in igneous magmas. J. Geol. 30 (S6), 513–570.

481

C.M. Lesher
Brügmann, G.E., Naldrett, A.J., Asif, M., Lightfoot, P.C., Gorbachev, N.S., Fedorenko, V.A., 1993. Siderophile and chalcophile metals as tracers of the evolution of the Siberian Trap in the Noril’sk region, Russia. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 57, 2001–2018.
Campbell, I.H., Barnes, S.J., 1984. A model for the geochemistry of the platinum group elements in magmatic sulphide deposits. Can. Mineral. 22, 151–160.
Campbell, I.H., Naldrett, A.J., 1979. The inﬂuence of silicate:sulﬁde ratios on the geochemistry of magmatic sulphides. Econ. Geol. 74, 1503–1506.
Carson, H.J.E., Lesher, C.M., Houlé, M.G., 2015. Geochemistry and Petrogenesis of the Black Thor Intrusive Complex, McFaulds Lake Greenstone Belt, Ontario, Canada. In: D.E. Ames, M.G. Houlé (Ed.), Targeted Geoscience Initiative 4, Canadian NickelCopper-Platinum Group Elements-Chromium Ore Systems—Fertility, Pathﬁnders, New and Revised Models, Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 7856, 89–101.
Chai, G., Naldrett, A.J., 1992. Characteristics of Ni-Cu-PGE mineralization and genesis of the Jinchuan deposit, northwest China. Econ. Geol. 87, 1475–1495.
Choudhuri, A., Iyer, S.S., Krouse, H.R., 1997. Sulfur isotopes in komatiite-hosted Ni-Cu sulﬁde deposits from the Morro do Ferro greenstone belt, southeastern Brazil. Int. Geol. Rev. 39 (3), 230–238.
Chung, H.-Y., Mungall, J.E., 2009. Physical constraints on the migration of immiscible ﬂuids through partially molten silicates, with special reference to magmatic sulﬁde ores. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 286, 14–22.
Cowden, A., Donaldson, M.J., Naldrett, A.J., Campbell, I.H., 1986. Platinum-group elements and gold in the komatiite-hosted Fe–Ni–Cu sulﬁde deposits at Kambalda, Western Australia. Econ. Geol. 81, 1226–1235.
de Bremond d’Ars, J., Arndt, N.T., Hallot, E., 2001. Analog experimental insights into the formation of magmatic sulﬁde deposits. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 186, 371–381.
DePaolo, D.J., 1981. Trace element and isotopic eﬀects of combined wallrock assimilation and fractional crystallization. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 53, 189–202.
Ding, X., Li, C., Ripley, E.M., Rossell, D., Kamo, S., 2010. The Eagle and East Eagle sulﬁde ore-bearing maﬁc-ultramaﬁc intrusions in the Midcontinent Rift System, upper Michigan: geochronology and petrologic evolution. Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst. 11 (3). http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2009GC002546.
Ding, X., Ripley, E.M., Shirey, S.B., Li, C., 2012. Os, Nd, O and S isotope constraints on country rock contamination in the conduit related Eagle Cu-Ni-(PGE) deposit, Midcontinent Rift System, upper Michigan. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 89, 10–30.
Donnelly, T.H., Lambert, I.B., Oehler, D.Z., Hallberg, J.A., Hudson, D.R., Smith, J.W., Bavinton, O.A., Golding, L., 1978. A reconnaissance study of stable isotopes ratios in Archaean rocks from the Yilgarn Block, Western Australia. Geol. Soc. Australia J. 24, 409–420.
Dowling, S.E., Barnes, S.J., Hill, R.E.T., Hicks, J.D., 2004. Komatiites and nickel sulﬁde ores of the Black Swan area, Yilgarn Craton, Western Australia. 2: Geology and genesis of the orebodies. Miner. Deposita 39, 707–728.
Eckstrand, O.R., Williamson, B.L., 1985. Vesicles in the Dundonald komatiites. Program and Abstracts, Geological Association of Canada—Mineralogical Association of Canada Annual Meeting, Abstract Volume 10, A-16.
Evans, D.M., Cowden, A., Barratt, R.M., 1989. Deformation and thermal erosion at the Foster nickel deposit, Kambalda-St. Ives, Western Australia. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Magmatic Sulphide Field Conference, Harare, Zimbabwe. Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, London.
Evans-Lamswood, D.M., Butt, D.P., Jackson, R.S., Lee, D.V., Muggridge, M.G., Wheeler, R.I., Wilton, D.H.C., 2000. Physical Controls Associated with the Distribution of Sulﬁdes in the Voisey’s Bay Ni-Cu-Co deposit, Labrador. Econ. Geol. 95, 749–769.
Farhangi, N., Lesher, C.M., Houlé, M.G., 2013, Project Unit 13-002. Mineralogy, Geochemistry and Petrogenesis of Nickel-Copper-Platinum Group Element Mineralization in the Black Thor Intrusive Complex, McFaulds Lake Greenstone Belt, Ontario; in Summary of Field Work and Other Activities, Ontario Geological Survey, Open File Report 6290, 55.1–55.8.
Farrow, C.E.G., Lightfoot, P.C., 2002. Sudbury PGE revisited: toward an integrated model. In: L. Cabri (Ed.), The Geology, Geochemistry, Mineralogy, and Mineral Beneﬁciation of the Platinum-Group Elements, Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum, Special Volume 54, 273–297.
Farrow, C.E.G., Watkinson, D.H., 1997. Geochemical evolution of the epidote zone, Fraser mine, Sudbury, Ontario: Ni-Cu-PGE remobilization by saline ﬂuids. Explor. Min. Geol. 5 (1), 17–31.
Fiorentini, M., Bekker, A., Rouxel, O., Wing, B.A., Maier, W., Rumble, D., 2012a. Multiple sulfur and iron isotope composition of magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) sulﬁde Mineralization from Eastern Botswana. Econ. Geol. 107, 105–116.
Fiorentini, M., Beresford, S., Barley, M., Duuring, P., Bekker, A., Rosengren, N., Cas, R., Hronsky, J., 2012b. District to camp controls on the genesis of komatiite-hosted nickel sulﬁde deposits, Agnew-Wiluna Greenstone Belt, Western Australia: insights from the multiple sulfur isotopes. Econ. Geol. 107, 781–796.
Frost, K.M., Groves, D.I., 1989a. Magmatic contacts between immiscible sulﬁde and komatiite melts; implications for genesis of Kambalda sulﬁde ores. Econ. Geol. 84, 1697–1704.
Frost, K.M., Groves, D.I., 1989b. Ocellar units at Kambalda: Evidence for sediment assimilation by komatiite lavas. In: Prendergast, M.D., Jones, M.J. (Eds.), Magmatic Sulﬁdes – Zimbabwe Volume, Proceedings of the Fifth Magmatic Sulﬁde Field Conference, Harare, Zimbabwe. Institution of Mining Metallurgy, London, pp. 207–214.
Green, A.H., Naldrett, A.J., 1981. The Langmuir volcanic peridotite-associated nickel deposits: Canadian equivalents of the Western Australian occurrences. Econ. Geol. 76, 1503–1523.
Gresham, J.J., Loftus-Hills, G.D., 1981. The geology of the Kambalda nickel ﬁeld, Western Australia. Econ. Geol. 76, 1373–1416.
Grinenko, L.I., 1985. Sources of sulfur of the nickeliferous and barren gabbro-dolerite intrusions of the northwestern Siberian platform. Int. Geol. Rev. 27, 695–708.

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Groves, D.I., Korkiakoski, E.A., McNaughton, N.J., Lesher, C.M., Cowden, A., 1986. Field evidence for thermal erosion by komatiites at Kambalda, Western Australia and the genesis of nickel ores. Nature 319, 136–139.
Haughton, D.R., Roeder, P.L., Skinner, B.J., 1974. Solubility of sulfur in maﬁc magmas. Econ. Geol. 69, 451–467.
Hiebert, R.S., Bekker, A., Wing, B.A., Rouxel, O.J., 2013. The role of paragneiss assimilation in the origin of the Voisey’s Bay Ni-Cu sulﬁde deposit, Labrador: multiple S and Fe isotope evidence. Econ. Geol. 108, 1459–1469.
Hiebert, R.S., Bekker, A., Houlé, M.G., Wing, B.A., Rouxel, O.J., 2016. Tracing sources of crustal contamination using multiple S and Fe isotopes in the Hart komatiite-associated Ni–Cu–PGE sulﬁde deposit, Abitibi greenstone belt, Ontario, Canada. Miner. Deposita 51, 919–935.
Holwell, D.A., Abraham-James, T., Keays, R.R., Boyce, A.J., 2012. The nature and genesis of marginal Cu-PGE-Au sulphide mineralisation in Paleogene Macrodykes of the Kangerlussuaq region, East Greenland. Mineral. Deposita 47 (1–2), 3–21.
Holwell, D.A., Keays, R.R., Firth, E.A., Findlay, J., 2014. Geochemistry and mineralogy of platinum group element mineralization in the River Valley Intrusion, Ontario, Canada: a model for early-stage sulfur saturation and multistage emplacement and the implications for “contact-type” Ni-Cu-PGE sulﬁde mineralization. Econ. Geol. 109, 689–712.
Houlé, M.G., Lesher, C.M., 2011. Komatiite-associated Ni-Cu-(PGE) mineralization in the Abitibi Greenstone Belt, Ontario. Rev. Econ. Geol. 17, 89–121.
Houlé, M.G., Lesher, C.M., Davis, P.C., 2012. Thermomechanical erosion and genesis of komatiite-associated Ni-Cu-(PGE) mineralization at the Alexo Mine, Abitibi Greenstone Belt, Ontario. Mineral. Deposita 47 (1–2), 105–128.
Hughes, H.S.R., McDonald, I., Boyce, A.J., Holwell, D.A., Kerr, A.C., 2016. Sulphide sinking in magma conduits: evidence from maﬁc-ultramaﬁc plugs on rum and the wider North Atlantic Igneous Province. J. Petrol. 57 (2), 383–416.
Huppert, H.E., Sparks, R.S.J., Turner, J.S., Arndt, N.T., 1984. Emplacement and cooling of komatiite lavas. Nature 309, 19–22.
Ivanov, B.A., Deutsch, A., 1999. Sudbury impact event: cratering mechanics and thermal history. Geol. Soc. Am. Spec. Pap. 339, 389–397.
Jugo, P.J., Luth, R.W., Richards, J.P., 2005. An experimental study of the sulfur content in basaltic melts saturated with immiscible sulﬁde or sulfate liquids at 1,300 C and 1.0 GPa. J. Petrol. 46, 783–798.
Karykowski, B.T., Polito, P.A., Maier, W.D., Gutzmer, J., 2015. Origin of Cu-Ni-PGE mineralization at the Manchego Prospect, West Musgrave Province, Western Australia. Econ. Geol. 110 (8), 2063–2085.
Keays, R.R., Lightfoot, P.C., 2004. Formation of Ni–Cu–platinum group element sulﬁde mineralization in the Sudbury impact melt sheet. Mineral. Petrol. 82, 217–258.
Keays, R.R., Lightfoot, P.C., 2010. Crustal sulfur is required to form magmatic Ni–Cu sulﬁde deposits: evidence from chalcophile element signatures of Siberian and Deccan Trap basalts. Miner. Deposita 45, 241–257.
Kerr, A., Leitch, A.M., 2005. Self-destructive sulﬁde segregation systems and the formation of high-grade magmatic ore deposits. Econ. Geol. 100, 311–332.
Kinnaird, J.A., Hutchinson, D., Schurmann, L., Nex, P.A.M., De Lange, R., 2005. Petrology and mineralisation of the Southern Platreef, northern limb of the Bushveld Complex, South Africa. Mineral. Deposita 40, 576–597.
Kullerud, G., Yund, R.A., Moh, G., 1969. Phase relations in the Fe-Ni-S, Cu-Fe-S, and CuNi-S systems. Econ. Geol. Monogr. 4, 323–343.
Labidi, J., Cartigny, P., Birck, J.L., Assayag, N., Bourrand, J.J., 2012. Determination of multiple sulfur isotopes in glasses: a reappraisal of the MORB δ34S. Chem. Geol. 334, 189–198.
Layton-Matthews, D.M., Lesher, C.M., Burnham, O.M., Hulbert, L., Peck, D.C., Golightly, J.P., Keays, R.R., 2010. Exploration for Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits in the Thompson nickel belt, Manitoba. Soc. Econ. Geol. Spec. 15, 513–538.
Le Vaillant, M., Barnes, S.J., Mungall, J.E., Mungall, E., 2017. Role of de-gassing of the Noril’sk nickel deposits in the Permo-Triassic mass extinction event. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114 (10), 2485–2490.
Lesher, C.M., 1989. Komatiite-associated nickel sulﬁde deposits. In: Whitney, J.A., Naldrett, A.J. (Eds.), Ore Deposition Associated with Magmas, Reviews in Economic Geology 4. Economic Geology Publishing Company, El Paso, pp. 45–101.
Lesher, C.M., 2007. Ni-Cu-(PGE) Deposits in the Raglan Area, Cape Smith Belt, New Québec. In: W.D. Goodfellow (Editor), Mineral Resources of Canada: A Synthesis of Major Deposit-types, District Metallogeny, the Evolution of Geological Provinces, and Exploration Methods, Geological Survey of Canada and Mineral Deposits Division of the Geological Association of Canada Special Publication 5, 351–386.
Lesher, C.M., 2009, Generation, transport, and collection of Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melts. In: Proceedings of the Xi’an International Ni-Cu-(Pt) Symposium, Northwestern Geology 42, 6–9.
Lesher, C.M., 2013a. The roles of local incorporation, in-situ segregation, and physical transport in the genesis of magmatic sulﬁde and oxide deposits, GAC-MAC Annual Meeting, Winnipeg, Abstract Volume, 128–129.
Lesher, C.M., 2013b. Physical transport and localization of magmatic Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melts. In: Conference Proceedings, SEG 2013: Geoscience for Discovery, Whistler BC, Society of Economic Geologists, abstract (p18) and poster (P1.12), ISBN 978-1629492-66-7.
Lesher, C.M., 2013c, Catastrophic sulﬁde saturation and genesis of Ni-Cu-PGE mineralization in the Sudbury Igneous Complex. In: Proceedings of the 12th Biennial SGA Meeting, v3, Uppsala, Sweden, 1040–1043.
Lesher, C.M., Arndt, N.T., 1995. Trace element and Nd isotope geochemistry, petrogenesis, and volcanic evolution of contaminated komatiites at Kambalda, Western Australia. Lithos 34, 127–157.
Lesher, C.M., Barnes, S.J., 2009. Komatiite-associated Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits. In: Li, C., Ripley, E.M. (Eds.), Magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE Deposits: Genetic Models and Exploration. Geological Publishing House of China, pp. 27–101.

482

C.M. Lesher
Lesher, C.M., Burnham, O.M., 2001. Multicomponent elemental and isotopic mixing in Ni-Cu-(PGE) ores at Kambalda, Western Australia. Can. Mineral. 39, 421–446.
Lesher, C.M., Campbell, I.H., 1993. Geochemical and ﬂuid dynamic modeling of compositional variations in Archean komatiite-hosted nickel sulﬁde ores in Western Australia. Econ. Geol. 88, 804–816.
Lesher, C.M., Groves, D.I., 1986. Controls on the formation of komatiite-associated nickel–copper sulﬁde deposits. In: Friedrich, G.H., Genkin, A.D., Naldrett, A.J. (Eds.), Geology and Metallogeny of Copper Deposits. Springer, pp. 43–62.
Lesher, C.M., Keays, R.R., 1984. Metamorphically and hydrothermally mobilized Fe-NiCu sulphides at Kambalda, Western Australia. In: Buchanan, D.L., Jones, M.J. (Eds.), Sulphide Deposits in Maﬁc and Ultramaﬁc Rocks. Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, London, pp. 62–69.
Lesher, C.M., Keays, R.R., 2002. Komatiite-associated Ni-Cu-(PGE) deposits: Mineralogy, geochemistry, and genesis. In: Cabri, L.J. (Ed.), The Geology, Geochemistry, Mineralogy, and Mineral Beneﬁciation of the Platinum-Group Elements. Special vol. 54. Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy, and Petroleum, pp. 579–617.
Lesher, C.M., Stone, W.E., 1996. Exploration geochemistry of komatiites. In: Wyman, D. (Ed.), Igneous Trace Element Geochemistry: Applications for Massive Sulphide Exploration. Geological Association of Canada, Short Course Notes 12, 153–204.
Lesher, C.M., Lee, R.F., Groves, D.I., Bickle, M.J., Donaldson, M.J., 1981. Geochemistry of komatiites from Kambalda, Western Australia: I. Chalcophile element depletion - a consequence of sulﬁde liquid separation from komatiitic magmas. Econ. Geol. 76, 1714–1728.
Lesher, C.M., Arndt, N.T., Groves, D.I., 1984. Genesis of komatiite-associated nickel sulphide deposits at Kambalda, Western Australia: a distal volcanic model. In: Buchanan, D.L., Jones, M.J. (Eds.), Sulphide Deposits in Maﬁc and Ultramaﬁc Rocks. Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, London, pp. 70–80.
Lesher, C.M., Barnes, S.-J., Gillies, S.L., and Ripley, E.M., 1999. Ni-Cu-(PGE) sulphides in the Raglan Block, in Lesher CM (Editor), Komatiitic Peridotite-Hosted Fe-Ni-Cu-(PGE) Sulphide Deposits in the Raglan Area, Cape Smith Belt, New Québec. Guidebook Series 2, Mineral Exploration Research Centre, Laurentian University, Sudbury: 177–184.
Lesher, C.M., Burnham, O.M., Keays, R.R., Barnes, S.J., Hulbert, L., 2001. Trace-element geochemistry and petrogenesis of barren and ore-associated komatiites. Can. Mineral. 39, 673–696.
Lesher, C.M., Carson, H.J.E., Metsaranta, R.T., Houlé MG, 2014. Genesis of chromite deposits by partial melting, physical transport, and dynamic upgrading of silicatemagnetite facies iron formation. In: 12th International Platinum Symposium, Yekaterinburg, Russia, Extended Abstract Volume, 36–38.
Lesher, C.M., Carson, H.J.E., Houlé, M.G., 2016. Genesis of chromite by dynamic upgrading of xenocrystic Fe ± Ti oxide, 35th International Geological Congress, Cape Town, South Africa. Extended Abstract Volume, 3892.
Lesher, C.M., Carson, H.J.E., Houlé, M.G., submitted. Genesis of chromite by dynamic upgrading of xenocrystic Fe ± Ti oxide, Geology.
Li, C., Naldrett, A.J., 2000. Melting reactions of gneissic inclusions with enclosing magma at Voisey’s Bay, Labrador, Canada; implications with respect to ore genesis. Econ. Geol. 95, 801–814.
Li, C., Ripley, E.M., 2005. Empirical equations to predict the sulfur content of maﬁc magmas at sulﬁde saturation and applications to magmatic sulﬁde deposits. Miner. Deposita 40, 218–230.
Lightfoot, P.C., 2016. Nickel Sulﬁde Ores and Impact Melts: Origin of the Sudbury Igneous Complex. Elsevier 680p.
Lightfoot, P.C., Evans-Lamswood, D.M., 2015. Structural controls on the primary distribution of maﬁc–ultramaﬁc intrusions containing Ni–Cu–Co–(PGE) sulﬁde mineralization in the roots of large igneous provinces. Ore Geol. Rev. 64, 354–386.
Lightfoot, P.C., Keays, R.R., Morrison, G.G., Bite, A., Farrell, K.P., 1997. Geologic and geochemical relationships between the contact Sublayer, inclusions, and the Main Mass of the Sudbury Igneous Complex—a case study of the Whistle Mine embayment. Econ. Geol. 92, 647–673.
Lightfoot, P.C., Keays, R.R., Evans-Lamswood, D., Wheeler, R., 2012. S saturation history of Nain plutonic suite maﬁc intrusions: origin of the Voisey’s Bay Ni–Cu–Co sulﬁde deposit, Labrador, Canada. Miner. Deposita 47, 23–50.
Maier, W.D., Smithies, R.H., Spaggiari, C.V., Barnes, S.J., Kirkland, C.L., Yang, S., Lahaye, Y., Kiddie, O., MacRae, C., 2016. Petrogenesis and Ni–Cu sulphide potential of maﬁc–ultramaﬁc rocks in the Mesoproterozoic Fraser Zone within the Albany-Fraser Orogen, Western Australia. Precambrian Res. 281, 27–46.
Mainwaring, P.R., Naldrett, A.J., 1977. Country rock assimilation and genesis of Cu-Ni sulﬁdes in the Water Hen intrusion, Duluth Complex, Minnesota. Econ. Geol. 72, 1269–1284.
Mariga, J., Ripley, E.M., Li, C., 2006. Petrologic evolution of gneissic xenoliths in the Voisey’s Bay Intrusion, Labrador, Canada: mineralogy, reactions, partial melting, and mechanisms of mass transfer. Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst. 7 (5), 25.
Mavrogenes, J.A., O'Neill, H.S.C., 1999. The relative eﬀects of pressure, temperature and oxygen fugacity on the solubility of sulﬁde in maﬁc magmas. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 63, 1173–1180.
McCormick, K.A., Fedorowich, J.S., McDonald, A.M., James, R.S., 2002. A textural, mineralogical, and statistical study of the footwall breccia within the Strathcona embayment of the Sudbury Structure. Econ. Geol. 97, 125–143.
McNamara, G.S., Lesher, C.M., Kamber, B.S., 2017. New feldspar lead isotope and trace element evidence from the Sudbury Igneous Complex indicate a complex origin of associated Ni-Cu-PGE mineralization involving underlying country rocks. Econ. Geol. 112 (3), 569–590.
McLeod, P., Sparks, R.S.J., 1998. The dynamics of xenolith assimilation. Contrib. Miner. Petrol. 132, 21–33.
Menard, T., Lesher, C.M., Stowell, H.H., Price, D.P., Pickell, J.R., Hulbert, L., 1996. Geology, genesis, and metamorphic history of the Namew Lake Fe-Ni-Cu-PGE

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
deposit, Manitoba. Econ. Geol. 91, 1394–1413. Mungall, J.E., 2007. Crustal contamination of picritic magmas during transport through
dikes: the expo intrusive suite, Cape Smith Fold Belt, New Quebec. J. Petrol. 48, 1021–1039. Mungall, J.E., Su, S., 2005. Interfacial tension between magmatic sulﬁde and silicate liquids: constraints on kinetics of sulﬁde liquation and sulﬁde migration through silicate rocks. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 234, 135–149. Mungall, J.E., Harvey, J.D., Balch, S.J., Azar, B., Atkinson, J., Hamilton, M.A., 2010. Eagle’s Nest: A magmatic Ni-sulﬁde deposit in the James Bay Lowlands, Ontario. Society of Economic Geologists, Special Publication, Canada 15: 539–557. Mungall, J.E., Brenan, J.M., Godel, B., Barnes, S.J., Gaillard, F., 2015. Transport of metals and sulphur in magmas by ﬂotation of sulphide melt on vapour bubbles. Nat. Geosci. 8, 216–219. Naldrett, A.J., 1966. The role of sulphurization in the genesis of iron-nickel sulphide deposits of the Porcupine District, Ontario. Can. Inst. Mining Metal. Trans. 69, 147–155. Naldrett, A.J., 2004. Magmatic Sulﬁde Deposits: Geology, Geochemistry and Exploration. Springerpp. 727. Naldrett, A.J., 2011. Fundamentals of magmatic sulﬁde deposits. In: Li, C., Ripley, E.M. (Ed.), Magmatic Ni-Cu and PGE deposits: Geology, Geochemistry, and Genesis: Reviews in Economic Geology 17, 1–50. Naldrett, A.J., Hewins, R.H., Dressler, B.O., Rao, B.V., 1984. The contact sublayer of the Sudbury igneous complex. In: Pye, E.G., Naldrett, A.J., Giblin, P.E. (Ed.), The Geology and Ore Deposits of the Sudbury Structure. Ontario Geological Survey Special Publication 1, 253–274. Nelles, E., 2012. Genesis of Cu-PPGE-rich veins and Au-Pd-Pt-Ni-Te-rich disseminated footwall mineralization in the Sudbury Igneous Complex, unpublished MSc thesis, Laurentian University, Sudbury, 77 pp. Nelles, E., Lesher, C.M., in revision. Genesis of Cu-PGE-rich Footwall-Type Mineralization in the Morrison Deposit, Sudbury. Economic Geology. Papunen, H., 2003. Ni-Cu sulﬁde deposits in maﬁc-ultramaﬁc orogenic intrusions: examples from the Svecofennian areas, Finland. In: Elipoulos et al. (Eds.), Mineral Exploration and Sustainable Development, Millpress, Rotterdam, 551–554. Pattison, E., 1979. The Sudbury sublayer. Can. Mineral. 17, 257–274. Peck, D.C., Keays, R.R., James, R.S., Chubb, P.T., Reeves, S.J., 2001. Controls on the formation of contact-type platinum-group element mineralization in the East Bull Lake intrusion. Econ. Geol. 96, 559–581. Perring, C.S., Barnes, S.J., Hill, R.E.T., 1995. The physical volcanology of komatiite sequences from Forrestania, Southern Cross Province, Western Australia. Lithos 34, 189–207. Petford, N., 2009. Which eﬀective viscosity? Mineral. Mag. 73 (2), 167–191. Piña, R., Lunar, R., Ortega, L., Gervilla, F., Alapieti, T., Martinez, C., 2006. Petrology and geochemistry of maﬁc–ultramaﬁc fragments from the Aguablanca Ni–Cu Ore Breccia, Southwest Spain. Econ. Geol. 101, 865–881. Prendergast, M.D., 2001. Komatiite-hosted Hunters Road nickel deposit, central Zimbabwe: physical volcanology and sulﬁde genesis. Aust. J. Earth Sci. 48, 681–694. Prevec, S.A., Lightfoot, P.C., Keays, R.R., 2000. Evolution of the sublayer of the Sudbury Igneous Complex: geochemical, Sm–Nd isotopic and petrologic evidence. Lithos 51, 271–292. Raskevicius, T., 2013. Reaction between magmatic sulﬁde melts and wall rocks in the Sudbury Igneous Complex. unpublished BSc Hons thesis Laurentian University, Sudbury, pp. 27. Reynolds, C.A., Menkea, H., Andrew, M., Blunt, M.J., Krevora, S., 2017. Dynamic ﬂuid connectivity during steady-state multiphase ﬂow in a sandstone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1702834114 [Early Access]. Ripley, E.M., 1981. Sulfur isotopic studies of the Dunka Road Cu-Ni deposit, Duluth Complex, Minnesota. Econ. Geol. 76, 610–620. Ripley, E.M., 1986. Application of stable isotopic studies to problems of magmatic sulﬁde ore genesis with special reference to the Duluth Complex, Minnesota. In: Friedrich, G., Genkin, A.D., Naldrett, A.J., Ridge, J.D., Sillitoe, R.H., Vokes, F.M. (Eds.), Geology and Metallogeny of Copper Deposits. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 25–42. Ripley, E.M., Alawi, J.A., 1988. Petrogenesis of pelitic xenoliths at the Babbitt Cu-Ni deposit, Duluth Complex, Minnesota, U.S.A. Lithos 21 (2), 143–159. Ripley, E.M., Li, C., 2003. Sulfur isotope exchange and metal enrichment in the formation of magmatic Cu-Ni-(PGE) deposits. Econ. Geol. 98, 635–641. Ripley, E.M., Li, C., 2011. A review of conduit related Ni–Cu–(PGE) sulﬁde mineralization at the Voisey’s Bay deposit, Labrador, and the Eagle deposit, northern Michigan. In: Li, C., Ripley, E.M. (Eds.), Magmatic Ni–Cu and PGE Deposits: Geology, Geochemistry and Genesis, Reviews in Economic Geology 17. Society of Economic Geologists, Denver, Colorado, pp. 181–198. Ripley, E.M., Li, C., 2013. Sulﬁde saturation in maﬁc magmas: Is external sulfur required for magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) ore genesis? Econ. Geol. 108, 45–58. Ripley, E.M., Severson, M.J., Hauk, S.A., 1998. Evidence for Sulﬁde and Fe-Ti-P-Rich Liquid Immiscibility in the Duluth Complex Minnesota. Econ. Geol. 93, 1052–1062. Ripley, E.M., Park, Y.R., Li, C., Naldrett, A.J., 1999. Sulfur and oxygen isotopic evidence of country rock contamination in the Voisey’s Bay Ni-Cu-Co deposit, Labrador, Canada. Lithos 47, 53–68. Ripley, E.M., Li, C., Shin, D., 2002. Paragneiss assimilation in the genesis of magmatic NiCu-Co sulﬁde mineralization at Voisey’s Bay, Labrador: δ34S, δ13C, and Se/S evidence. Econ. Geol. 97, 1307–1318. Ripley, E.M., Lightfoot, P.C., Stifter, E.C., Underwood, B., Taranovic, V., Dunlop III, M., Donoghue, K.A., 2015. Heterogeneity of S isotope compositions recorded in the Sudbury igneous complex, Canada: signiﬁcance to formation of Ni-Cu sulﬁde ores and the host rocks. Econ. Geol. 110, 1125–1135. Robertson, J., Ripley, E.M., Barnes, S.J., Li, C., 2015. Sulfur liberation from country rocks and incorporation in maﬁc magmas. Econ. Geol. 110, 1111–1123.

483

C.M. Lesher
Robertson, J.C., Barnes, S.J., Le Vaillant, M., 2015. Dynamics of magmatic sulphide droplets during transport in silicate melts and implications for magmatic sulphide ore formation. J. Petrol. 56, 2445–2472.
Rose, L.A., Brenan, J.M., 2001. Wetting properties of Fe-Ni-Co-Cu-O-S melts against olivine: implications for sulﬁde melt mobility. Econ. Geol. 96, 145–157.
Sakai, H., Marais, D., Ueda, A., Moore, J., 1984. Concentrations and isotope ratios of carbon, nitrogen and sulfur in ocean-ﬂoor basalts. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 48 (12), 2433–2441.
Samalens, N., Barnes, S.-J., Sawyer, E.J., 2017. The role of black shales as a source of sulfur and semimetals in magmatic nickel copper deposits: example from the Partridge River Intrusion, Duluth Complex, Minnesota, USA. Ore Geol. Rev. 81, 173–187.
Saumur, B.M., Cruden, A.R., Boutelier, D., 2015a. Sulﬁde liquid entrainment by silicate magma: implications for the dynamics and petrogenesis of magmatic sulﬁde deposits. J. Petrol. 56 (12), 473–2490.
Saumur, B.M., Cruden, A.R., Evans-Lamswood, D.M., Lightfoot, P.C., 2015b. Wall-Rock Structural Controls on the Genesis of the Voisey’s Bay Intrusion and its Ni-Cu-Co Magmatic Sulﬁde Mineralization (Labrador, Canada). Econ. Geol. 110, 691–711.
Seat, Z., Beresford, S.W., Grguric, B.A., Waugh, R.S., Hronsky, J.M.A., Gee, M.A.M., Groves, D.I., Mathison, C.I., 2007. Architecture and emplacement of the Nebo-Babel gabbronorite-hosted magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE sulphide deposit, West Musgrave, Western Australia. Mineral. Deposita XX, XXX-XXX.
Seat, Z., Beresford, S.W., Grguric, B.A., Gee, M.A.M., Grassineau, N.V., 2009. Reevaluation of the role of external sulfur addition in the genesis of Ni-Cu-PGE Deposits, Evidence from the Nebo-Babel Ni-Cu-PGE Deposit, West Musgrave, Western Australia. Econ. Geol. 104, 521–538.
Seccombe, P.K., Groves, D.I., Binns, R.A., Smith, J.W., 1978. A sulfur isotopic study to test a genetic model for Fe-Ni sulphide mineralization at Mt Windarra, Western Australia. In: B.W. Robinson (Ed.), Stable isotopes in the earth sciences. New Zealand Department of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Wellingston, DSIR Bull 220, 187–200.
Seccombe, P.K., Groves, D.I., Marston, R.J., Barrett, F.M., 1981. Sulﬁde paragenesis and sulfur mobility in Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde ores at Lunnon and Juan Main Shoots, Kambalda: textural and sulfur isotopic evidence. Econ. Geol. 76, 1675–1685.
Shaw, H.R., 1972. Viscosities of magmatic silicate liquids: an empirical method of prediction. Am. J. Sci. 272 (870), 893.
Shima, H., Naldrett, A.J., 1975. Solubility of sulfur in an ultramaﬁc melt and the relevance of the system Fe-S-O. Econ. Geol. 70, 960–967.
Spath, C.S. III, 2017. Geology and Genesis of Hybridized Ultramaﬁc Rocks in the Black Label Hybrid Zone of the Black Thor Intrusive Complex, McFaulds Lake Greenstone Belt, Ontario, Canada, unpublished MSc thesis, Laurentian University, 102 pp.
Spath, C.S. III, Lesher, C.M, Houlé, M.G, 2015. Hybridized ultramaﬁc rocks in the Black Label hybrid zone of the Black Thor intrusive complex, McFaulds Lake greenstone belt, Ontario. In: D.E. Ames and M.G. Houlé (Ed.), Targeted Geoscience Initiative 4: Canadian Nickel-Copper-Platinum Group Elements-Chromium Ore Systems—Fertility, Pathﬁnders, New and Revised Models, Geological Survey of

Ore Geology Reviews 90 (2017) 465–484
Canada, Open File 7856, 105–114. Sproule, R.A., Sutcliﬀe, R., Tracanelli, H., Lesher, C.M., 2008. Palaeoproterozoic Ni-Cu-
PGE mineralization in the Shakespeare Intrusion: a new style of Nipissing gabbrohosted mineralization. Inst. Min. Metal. 116 (4), 188–200. Staude, S., Barnes, S.J., Le Vaillant, M., 2016. Evidence of lateral thermomechanical erosion of basalt by Fe-Ni-Cu sulﬁde melt at Kambalda, Western Australia. Geology 44, 1047–1050. Staude, S., Le Vaillant, M., Barnes, S.J., 2017. Thermomechanical excavation of orehosting embayments beneath komatiite lava channels: textural evidence from the Moran deposit, Kambalda, Western Australia. Ore Geol. Rev this volume. Taranovic, V., Ripley, E.M., Li, C., Rossell, D., 2016. Chalcophile element (Ni, Cu, PGE, and Au) variations in the Tamarack magmatic sulﬁde deposit in the Midcontinent Rift System: implications for dynamic ore-forming processes. Miner. Deposita 51, 937–951. Thériault, R.D., Barnes, S.-J., 1998. Compositional variations in Cu-Ni-PGE sulﬁdes of the Dunka Road deposit, Duluth Complex, Minnesota: the importance of combined assimilation and magmatic processes. Can. Mineral. 36, 869–886. Tsujimura, T., Kitakaze, A., 2004. New phase relations in the Cu-Fe-S system at 800 C; constraints of fractional crystallization of a sulﬁde liquid. Neues Jahrbuch für Mineralogie - Monatshefte 2004, 433–444. Tsuchiyama, A., 1986. Melting and dissolution kinetics: application to partial melting and dissolution of xenoliths. J. Geophys. Res. 91 (B9), 9395–9406. Tyson, R.M., Chang, L.L.Y., 1984. The petrology and sulﬁde mineralization of the Partridge River troctolite, Duluth Complex, Minnesota. Can. Mineral. 22, 23–38. Ullmann, A., Zamir, M., Ludmer, Z., Brauner, N., 2003. Stratiﬁed laminar countercurrent ﬂow of two liquid phases in inclined tubes. Int. J. Multiph. Flow 29, 1583–1604. Wang, Y., Lesher, C.M., Lightfoot, P.C., 2016. Shock metamorphic features of olivine, orthopyroxene, amphibole, and plagioclase in phlogopite-bearing ultramaﬁc-maﬁc inclusions in Contact Sublayer, Sudbury Igneous Complex, PDAC Annual Meeting, Toronto. Wang, Y., Lesher, C.M., Lightfoot, P.C., Pattison, E.F., Golightly, J.P., 2016. Shock metamorphic features of olivine, orthopyroxene, amphibole, and plagioclase in phlogopite-bearing ultramaﬁc-maﬁc inclusions in Contact Sublayer, Sudbury Igneous Complex, 35th International Geological Congress, Capetown, South Africa, Abstract Volume, 5802. Wendlandt, R.F., 1982. Sulﬁde saturation of basalt and andesite melts at high pressures and temperatures. Am. Mineral. 67, 877–885. Williams, D.A., Kerr, R.C., Lesher, C.M., 1998. Emplacement and erosion by Archean komatiite lava ﬂows: revisited. J. Geophys. Res. 103 (B11), 27533–27549. Williams, D.A., Kerr, R.C., Lesher, C.M., Barnes, S.J., 2002. Analytical/numerical modeling of komatiite lava emplacement and thermal erosion at Perseverance, Western Australia. J. Volcanol. Geoth. Res. 110, 27–55. Yang, S.-H., Zhou, M.-F., Lightfoot, P.C., Malpas, J., Qu, W.-J., Zhou, J.-B., Kong, D.-Y., 2012. Selective crustal contamination and decoupling of lithophile and chalcophile element isotopes in sulﬁde-bearing maﬁc intrusions: an example from the Jingbulake Intrusion, Xinjiang, NW China. Chem. Geol. 302–303, 106–118.

484

