Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

HOSTED BY

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect China University of Geosciences (Beijing)
Geoscience Frontiers
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/gsf

Focus Paper
Episodic events in long-term geological processes: A new classiﬁcation and its applications
Dmitry A. Ruban
Southern Federal University, 23-ja linija Street 43, Rostov-na-Donu, 344019, Russia

article info
Article history: Received 21 August 2017 Received in revised form 3 October 2017 Accepted 9 November 2017 Available online 28 November 2017 Handling Editor: Christopher Spencer
Keywords: Biodiversity dynamics Early Triassic warming Geological classiﬁcation Plate tectonics Toarcian

abstract
Long-term geological processes are usually described with curves reﬂecting continuous changes in the characteristic parameters through the geological history, and such curves can be employed directly for recognition of episodic (relatively long-term) events linked to these changes. The episodic events can be classiﬁed into several categories according to their scale (ordinary and anomalous events), “shape” (positive, negative, and neutral events), and relation to long-term trend change (successive, interruptive, facilitative, stabilizing, transformative, increasing, and decreasing). Many types of these events can be deﬁned depending on the combination of the above-mentioned patterns. Of course, spatial rank, duration, and origin can be also considered in description of these events. The proposed classiﬁcation can be applied to events in some real long-term geological processes, which include global sea-level changes, biodiversity dynamics, lithospheric plate number changes, and palaeoclimate changes. Several case examples prove the usefulness of the classiﬁcation. It is established that the Early Valanginian (Early Cretaceous) eustatic lowstand (the lowest position of the sea level in the entire Cretaceous) was negative, but ordinary and only interruptive event. In the other case, it becomes clear that the only end-Ordovician and the Permian/Triassic mass extinctions transformed the trends of the biodiversity dynamics (from increase to decrease and from decrease to increase respectively), and the only Cretaceous/Paleogene mass extinction was really anomalous event on the Phanerozoic biodiversity curve. The new palaeontological data are employed to reconstruct the diversity dynamics of brachiopods in Germany (without the Alps) and the Swiss Jura Mountains. The further interpretation of the both diversity curves implies that the Early Toarcian mass extinction affected the regional brachiopod faunas strongly, but this event was only decreasing (biotic radiation continued after it, although “restarted” from the lower point) similarly to the end-Triassic and Cretaceous/Paleogene mass extinctions. The number of lithospheric plates decreased in the Early Cretaceous; however, the previous trend to increase in this number reestablished after the noted event. The Oi-1 glaciation in the very beginning of the Oligocene was anomalous event, but it only stabilized the earlier trend of temperature decline and did not transform it. Further development of the comprehensive classiﬁcation of geological events is necessary. For instance, it has become clear that the Silurian environmental perturbations and the Cretaceous oceanic anoxic events should be classiﬁed as discrete events that differ essentially from episodic events, the latter of which are relevant to continuous changes in geological processes.
Ó 2017, China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and Peking University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction
The modern development of geosciences has been marked by the increased attention of researchers to the development/ improvement of classiﬁcations of various geological phenomena.
E-mail address: ruban-d@mail.ru. Peer-review under responsibility of China University of Geosciences (Beijing).

For instance, Miall (2016) distinguished four classes of unconformities and Carroll (2017) introduced recently an additional type of unconformities; Blair and McPherson (1999, 2009), Blott and Pye (2012), Farrell et al. (2012), Terry and Goff (2014), Lokier and Al Junaibi (2016), and Bruno and Ruban (2017) contributed to the improvement of sedimentary nomenclatures; Van Daele et al. (2017) classiﬁed turbidites; Festa et al. (2016) distinguished many types of olistostromes; Peacock et al. (2016, 2017a,b) normalized the fault nomenclature; Merle (2011) classiﬁed continental rifts;

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2017.11.004 1674-9871/Ó 2017, China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and Peking University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NCND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

378 D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

and Dill (2010) proposed a new scheme for classiﬁcation of mineral deposits. All these research developments have been fueled by the high demand for systematization of the geological information and interpretations that have accumulated during two past decades, when more attention has been paid to original research based on data collection than to conceptual treatment of multiple particular evidence. Such a situation appears to be very favorable for the further development of new geological classiﬁcations.
The geological history can be described in two modes, namely via processes and events. In the ﬁrst case, attention is paid to the continuous changes. In the second case, discrete changes are considered. However, these two modes of description are not mutually excluding because each process can be understood as a series of events. It should be noted that some events match trends and even constitute them directly, whereas the other events mark signiﬁcant deviations from these trends or interruptions of the latter. Evidently, geological events deserve to be classiﬁed. The fundamental reasons for doing this are the urgency of accurate description of geological events, the necessity of clear distinction between ordinary and catastrophic events (cf. Gutak and Ruban, 2013), and the importance of genetic interpretations of events. The practical reasons include the rise of the event stratigraphy (e.g., Walliser, 1986, 1995, 1996; Wiese et al., 2004; Fan et al., 2009; Moros et al., 2017), the necessity of highly-complex interpretations of biodiversity curves for palaeobiological developments (Aberhan and Kiessling, 2012; Aberhan et al., 2012; Ruban, 2015a) and eustatic curves for discussions of cyclicity regularities (Ruban, 2015b; Plyusnina et al., 2016), and ﬁnally, the high value of event recognition for geoheritage and geotourism assessments (Bruno et al., 2014; Sallam and Ruban, 2017).
More than a decade ago, Ruban (2006) attempted to systematize the knowledge of geological events, but his very tentative ideas (published in Russian and in a very local edition) need justiﬁcation and testing. The main objectives of the present paper are to propose the new classiﬁcation of episodic events in long-term geological processes and to demonstrate its application to different phenomena, including biodiversity dynamics, global sea-level changes, etc. It should be stressed that the purpose of this classiﬁcation is provision of template for easy distinction of episodic events on the available curves reﬂecting the dynamics of various long-term geological processes. Moreover, the present paper aims to show that the circle of geological events is very broad, and there are many other events in addition to such well-known events as mass extinctions and oceanic anoxic events.
2. Classiﬁcation of episodic events

correspond to episodes of the geological time, and, thus, these can be called episodic events. However, such a simple deﬁnition is not enough. Sea-level rises and falls, changes in biodiversity, and other events occurred permanently in the Earth’s history. In contrast, the well-known Silurian environmental perturbations (Aldridge et al., 1993; Jeppson et al., 1995; Jeppson and Aldridge, 2000; Calner, 2005; Johnson, 2006; Lehnert et al., 2010; Spiridonov, 2017) and the Cretaceous oceanic anoxic events (Schlanger and Jenkyns, 1976; Erba, 2004; Takashima et al., 2006; Faucher et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017) were individual events in the Earth’s history. This is why it is sensible to make a distinction between continuous and discrete changes and the relevant events. Moreover, many discrete changes were highly-complex in nature, and they cannot be attributed to any single geological process. In fact, the oceanic anoxic events were associated with striking perturbations in carbon cycle, geochemical anomalies, palaeobioproductivity changes, fossil diversity declines, etc. Provisionally, it is suggested to assign to the episodic events only those events that were relevant to the continuous changes linked to any single process. The OAEs are discrete events, i.e., they are not considered as episodic events sensu stricto.
There may be different approaches for the recognition of episodic events, and the choice of the proper approach is determined by the analytical needs of a particular study. If the given geological process leads to apparently chaotic (e.g., non-cyclic) changes, the episodic events can be related to each principal change, e.g., increases, decreases, accelerations, etc. of any parameter (Fig. 1A). If the process is more or less cyclic, episodic events correspond to the half cycles (Fig. 1B). Finally, in the case of processes characterized by multiple minor changes superimposed by a few strong changes, the latter entirely can be understood as episodic events (Fig. 1C).
Episodic events can be analyzed with two approaches. The ﬁrst approach is the simple analysis of the curves describing geological processes. In this case, the sequence of events is established, and each of these events has to be described “as is”. For instance, the event 1 on Fig. 1A can be deﬁned as rise, the event 2 is slight fall, and the event 3 is accelerated fall. Of course, changes between these episodes can be also treated as events depending on the research needs. The second approach is more advanced, and it is suitable when a long-term geological process is studied. In this case, it is necessary to analyze episodic events with the reference to trends (tendencies). The changes relevant to some events are the only expressions of the long-term trend, but the other changes may mark changes of the trend (e.g., from long-term increase to longterm decrease). These elementary considerations form the basis for further distinction of numerous types of the episodic events.

2.1. Conceptual remarks

2.2. Types of events

Geological events are essentially changes of the geological environment or its particular constituents. On the long-term scale, each geological process can be described as a series of continuous changes of any characteristic parameter. For instance, eustasy is a permanent change of the global sea level measured in meters relatively to its present position; in this case, events are global sealevel rises and falls, cycles of which repeat permanently. Of course, very different changes can be distinguished as events. The latter can be (almost) immediate and, thus, look like “points” on the curve describing any geological process. However, detecting such events is complex task, successful solution of which depends on the resolution of the available data and the methodological errors linked to the curve reconstruction. More often, geologists deal with the events that lasted reasonable time, i.e., which may be recognized on a regular basis on the more or less long-term scale. These events

Several categories of episodic events can be distinguished with regard to their scale, “shape”, and relation to trend change (consideration of some other parameters is also possible e see below). According to their scale, all events can be either ordinary or anomalous (Fig. 2). The former are the events that constitute signiﬁcant part of the trend, and the relevant changes do not mark serious deviations from this trend. In contrast, the anomalous events are serious deviations from the trend.
“Shape” means the appearance of the event on the analyzed curve describing changes in the characteristic parameter of the given geological process. In this case, episodic events can be positive, negative, and neutral. Positive events mark changes that lead to the higher value/position of the parameter. A typical example is the event 2 on Fig. 1B. In contrast, negative events mark changes that lead to the lower value/position of the parameter. A typical

D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

379

A
B
C
Figure 1. Different approaches of episodic event recognition: (A) half-cycle approach, (B) down-up approach, (C) up-down approach.
example is the event 3 on Fig. 1A. Finally, neutral events mark the apparent absence (or almost total absence) of changes. Better to say, some changes occur because the geological process continues, but these changes are not reﬂected (or poorly reﬂected) by the analyzed curve. A typical example is the event 2 on Fig. 1A.
Figure 2. Ordinary versus anomalous episodic events.

There may be also different relations of the episodic events to trend changes. This category is so important because its consideration permits emphasis on the role of the given event in the geological history. Some events only “sustain” trends, the other events facilitate or, in contrast, stabilize trends, and, ﬁnally, there may be events that lead to the total changes of trends (e.g., from increasing trend to decreasing trend). According to the possible relations, seven categories of episodic events can be distinguished, and the relevant events are termed here as successive, interruptive, facilitative, stabilizing, transformative, increasing, and decreasing (Fig. 3). It should be added that these patterns can be combined.
The classiﬁcation of the episodic events considers all three parameters, i.e., scale, “shape”, and relation to trend change. These parameters can be combined differently, and numerous types of possible episodic events are established as a result (Table 1). This classiﬁcation can be used further for the purposes of the analyses of the real geological data, and these analyses themselves will contribute to testing and possible improvement of the classiﬁcation. Five case examples given below deal with the application of the proposed classiﬁcation of the episodic events to the very different long-term processes in the geological history.
Of course, some other parameters can be considered when necessary. For instance, these may include spatial rank, duration, and origin (see also Walliser, 1986, 1995, 1996). However, some precautions are necessary. The spatial rank (global, regional, local) of the event reﬂects the spatial restriction of the analyzed curve. It is evident that the curve depicting changes in the global process can be used for interpretation of the only global events, and the latter cannot be interpreted with the regional curve. If so, the spatial rank can be excluded from the main parameters simply because it is already known from the information chosen for the analysis. The duration of the event is not always easy to judge about. Of course, some advanced geochronological and geochemical studies permit to measure the length of some events, but such detailed information is not available in many cases. Much depends on what and how is measured. For instance, it is now established that the endPermian catastrophe was a relatively short-term event with a duration n Â 104en Â 105 years (Erwin, 2006; Huang et al., 2011; Li et al., 2016). However, we can exclude neither the prelude to this event, nor the following recovery, and, if so, this event may appear to be much longer. The problems of such a kind were considered by Wang et al. (2012). Moreover, the geologic time scale is under permanent change (Ogg et al., 2016), and, thus, what seems to be relatively short today may become not so short a few years later, and vice versa. Finally, the origin of the event is always clear from the interpreted curve (similarly to the spatial rank). Of course, it is usually easy to make a distinction between abiotic and biotic events. However, detailed classiﬁcation of the episodic events on the basis of their origin would be a difﬁcult task because its successful solution requires classiﬁcation of all long-term geological processes, which means construction of typology of the majority of the known geological phenomena. Such a typology and the noted classiﬁcation can be only subjective, which will limit the use of the classiﬁcation proposed in this paper. Anyway, spatial rank, duration, origin, and other parameters can be used for better description of the established episodic events when necessary and possible.
Principally, the recognition of the above-mentioned types of the episodic events can be done with some quantitative approach(es). However, the latter are not proposed and employed in the present paper because of three mean reasons. First, classiﬁcations (especially new ones) should be as simple as possible to become really clear. Second, the both approaches and criteria for quantitative judgments of the episodic events may be different depending on the research needs and preferences. Each classiﬁcation can employ only some approaches and criteria, and, if so, such a classiﬁcation will be

380 D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

Interruptive

Transformative

Facilitative

Increasing

Stabilizing

Decreasing

Figure 3. Long-term trend changes and relevant episodic events (successive events are not shown because these do not coincide with any trend change). Note that trends, and not original curves are shown. Changes are marked in blue color.

subjective and dependent on the available information, which means less acceptability and restricted use by the specialists. Third and most important, some (if not many) curves describing geological processes and used for interpretation of episodic units are reconstructed on semi-quantitative basis or low-resolution. Therefore, such curves are difﬁcult to quantify. In contrast, the qualitative classiﬁcation, the employment of which requires only simple visual analysis of the curves, can work without restrictions in such cases.
3. Global sea-level changes
3.1. Cretaceous eustasy
The Cretaceous was marked by the both exceptional global sealevel highstand (Larson, 1991; Ruban et al., 2010a; Haq, 2014) and the beginning of glacioeustasy (Haq et al., 1987; Miller et al., 2005; Galeotti et al., 2009; Maurer et al., 2013; Peropadre et al., 2013). The eustatic ﬂuctuations were numerous, diverse, and hierarchically“layered” (Immenhauser and Matthews, 2004; Miller et al., 2005; Kominz et al., 2008; Haq, 2014; Ruban, 2015b). The most “fresh” curve of the Cretaceous global sea-level changes was developed by Haq (2014), and it can be employed directly for the analysis of some episodic events. Five episodic events are randomly selected for the purposes of this paper (Fig. 4).
The event s1 corresponded to the very beginning of the Valanginian when the global sea-level reached its lowest point in the

Cretaceous (Fig. 4). Probably, this lowstand was linked to the “cold snap” (Grasby et al., 2017). The event was negative because it was sea-level fall essentially. It cannot be judged anomalous because this fall was of the same strength (>50 m, but <100 m) as many precedent and forthcoming events. The relation to the trend change is not so easy to establish. On the one hand, this event marked the prominent Cretaceous lowstand. On the other hand, the negative trend (long-term sea-level fall) changed to the positive trend (longterm sea-level rise) a bit later, i.e., closely to the mid-Valanginian. Most likely, the s1 event was the only interruptive, not transformative. This means that the role of the extreme lowstands in the long-term global sea-level changes should not be exaggerated.
The event s2 corresponded to the outstanding sea-level change in the beginning of the Barremian (Fig. 4). This event was evidently negative because this was prominent sea-level fall. Undoubtedly, it was anomalous because the strength of this fall (>150 m) exceeded that of many precedent and forthcoming events. This fall only interrupted, but did not change the clear trend toward global sealevel rise that lasted since the mid-Valanginian and culminated in the mid-Barremian. That is why this episodic event was interruptive.
The event s3 was a big sea-level rise in the very end of the Albian, and, thus, this was a positive event (Fig. 4). Although this rise was really big and longer than many other events, it was not anomalous, but rather ordinary (its “shape” is comparable to that of the other events). This event corresponded to the slight, but clear change of

D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

381

Table 1 Classiﬁcation of episodic events in long-term geological processes.

Trend change

Event “shape”

Positive

Negative

Neutral

No change (successive) Ordinary

Ordinary

Ordinary

Interruptive

Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary

Facilitative

Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary

Stabilizing

Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary

Transformative

Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary

Increasing

Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary

Decreasing

Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary/Anomalous Ordinary

the trend. Since the beginning of the Albian, the global sea level rose in exponential mode. However, this rise became less intense after the discussed event (this rise culminated in the Turonian), and, thus, the latter should be judged stabilizing. Interestingly, the AlbianeCenomanian transition was marked by the nearly global sedimentation break (Zorina et al., 2008; Matthews et al., 2012), which seems to be interruptive event. The combination of the stabilizing event and the followed interruptive event highlights the complexity of the mid-Cretaceous global sea-level changes.
The event s4 marked the TuronianeConiacian transition, when the global sea level fell (Fig. 4). Evidently, this event was negative, ordinary, and successive. In the other words, this was a very typical eustatic event of the Cretaceous.

Figure 4. Episodic events in the Cretaceous global sea-level changes (the eustatic curve is adapted from Haq, 2014). Abbreviations: s1, s2, s3, s4, s5 e events chosen as examples for the purposes of this paper.

382 D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

The event s5 occurred in the Late Campanian, when the minor global sea-level highstand took place (Fig. 4). The sea-level rise relevant to the event itself was very small (a few dozens of meters), and this was a typical positive and ordinary event. However, this event marked a change of the long-term trend. The eustatic rise started since the beginning of the Campanian, and the event e5 was its culmination point. Then, gradual fall started, and this trend sustained until the end of the Cretaceous. That is why the event s5 was transformative.
3.2. Paleogene eustatic interruptions
The global sea level ﬂuctuated strongly in the Paleogene (Haq et al., 1987; Haq and Al-Qahtani, 2005; Miller et al., 2005; Kominz et al., 2008; Plyusnina et al., 2016). However, Ruban et al. (2010b, 2012) established that there were intervals in the Paleocene (at least) when these ﬂuctuations were superimposed by the regional events that led to the apparent temporal interruptions in the global eustatic cycles. If this hypothesis is correct, these interruptions were very unusual episodic events.
The above-mentioned interruptions can be classiﬁed as follows. First, these events were neutral, because neither rise, nor fall of the global sea level took place. Second, these were ordinary events because of the absence of changes. Third, these were interruptive events sensu stricto: the global trends were broken for certain time. Moreover, the reconstruction of Ruban et al. (2012) shows that the interruptive pattern of such events could be combined with any other pattern (e.g., transformative), although more precise reconstructions for the longer intervals of the geological history are necessary to judge about these combinations.
4. Palaeobiodiversity dynamics
4.1. General remarks and Phanerozoic events other than mass extinctions
The importance of the curves describing the Phanerozoic palaeobiodiversity dynamics has been known from the 19th century, when such a curve was used to make a distinction between the main eras (Rudwick, 2008). The much later studies by Newell (1967), Sepkoski et al. (1981), Sepkoski (1993, 1997), Benton

(1995, 2001), Peters and Foote (2001), Bambach (2006), Stanley (2007), Alroy et al. (2008), Mayhew et al. (2008), Purdy (2008), Melott and Bambach (2011a,b, 2014), Aberhan and Kiessling (2012), Aberhan et al. (2012), Zaffos et al. (2017), and many other specialists have made analyses of these curves an independent geoscience discipline. Presently, the both “classical” palaeobiodiversity reconstructions (i.e., those based on the number of taxa plotted against the time scale e e.g., Purdy (2008) on the data of Sepkoski (2002)) and the “modelled” reconstructions (i.e., those based on the special palaeontological data processing aimed at consideration of the possible biases in the fossil record e e.g., Alroy et al. (2008)) are available. The former are chosen for discussion in the present paper because of their higher resolution and simplicity for understanding, although the latter can be analyzed later with the same approach.
The Phanerozoic marine biodiversity curve of Purdy (2008) based on the data from the famous compilation of Sepkoski (2002) depicts numerous changes in the number of genera throughout the Phanerozoic. Three events can be taken as examples (Fig. 5). The event b1 occurred in the second half of the Cambrian (Fig. 5). This event was positive because this was essentially biodiversity rise. The strength of this rise (increase in the total number of genera by >500 taxa) was comparable to the strength of many other Phanerozoic biodiversity changes, and, thus, the discussed event was ordinary. The CambrianeEarly Ordovician trend of the biodiversity dynamics was uncertain in somewhat. It is possible to conclude that the number of genera ﬂuctuated broadly, but near the same level (Fig. 5). The event b1 was one of such ﬂuctuations, and, thus, this was a mere successive event. It neither changed, not interrupted the long-term trend. This is example of when really big change was not remarkable with regard to its scale and relation to trend change.
The event b2 took place in the second half of the Carboniferous when the marine biodiversity decreased signiﬁcantly (Fig. 5). Essentially, this was a negative event. Although the number of genera reduced signiﬁcantly (by >500 genera) and rather abruptly, similar events occurred earlier and later, and, thus, the episodic event b2 seems to be more ordinary than anomalous. The longterm trend towards marine biodiversity decline corresponded to the entire SilurianePermian time interval. The discussed event matched this trend very well, and, thus, this event was only successive.

Figure 5. Episodic events in the Phanerozoic marine biodiversity dynamics (the biodiversity curve is after Purdy (2008), whose reconstruction is based on the database of Sepkoski (2002)). Abbreviations: b1, b2, b3 e events chosen as examples for the purposes of this paper, b1e ordinary, positive, successive, b2e ordinary, negative, successive, b3e ordinary, positive, facilitative; the Big Five mass extinctions: eO e end-Ordovician, F/F e Frasnian/Famennian, P/T e Permian/Triassic, eT e end-Triassic, K/T e Cretaceous/Paleogene.

D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

383

The event b3 corresponded to the minor marine biodiversity acceleration in the midst of the Early Cretaceous (Fig. 5). Therefore, the event was essentially positive and ordinary. The trend towards biodiversity increase established yet in the Triassic, although it was punctuated by a series of crises (see below). However, it was the midst of the Early Cretaceous when the biotic radiation strengthened, and, thus, the marine biodiversity started to rise more rapidly. Therefore, the event 3e was facilitative. This is also an example of when very minor event was of big evolutionary importance.
4.2. Big Five mass extinctions
The Phanerozoic biotic evolution was punctuated by several crises, the largest of which are known as mass extinctions (Alvarez et al., 1980; Raup and Sepkoski, 1982; Hallam and Wignall, 1997; Twitchett, 2006; Courtillot, 2007; Bond and Grasby, 2017; Erlykin et al., 2017). The most severe catastrophes known as “the Big Five” mass extinctions marked the end-Ordovician, the Frasnian/ Famennian boundary, the Permian/Triassic boundary, the endTriassic, and the Cretaceous/Paleogene boundary. These were outstanding events in the palaeobiodiversity dynamics that deserve close attention. At the ﬁrst glance, these appear to be discrete events and, thus, different from the episodic events (sensu stricto) considered in this paper. However, mass extinctions can be easily attributed to the biodiversity dynamics, and, thus, they represent some of the changes that occurred continuously throughout the geological history. This is why it is sensible to judge them as episodic events. Their appearance on the “classical” curve (Fig. 5) permits making some interesting conclusions about their essence (Table 2).
Evidently, all Big Five mass extinctions were negative events because they led to the biodiversity drops. Surprisingly, their scale is questionable. The only K/T event was almost unprecedentedly strong e the number of genera reduced by w1000 (this is not so even for the famous P/T event e see below). All other mass extinctions were comparable in strength to many other events in the Phanerozoic history of life (Fig. 5). This is especially so in the case of the eO and F/F events. The P/T mass extinction, according to the reconstruction of Purdy (2008), was not strong, but it resulted into the unexpectedly low number of genera that is atypical for the Phanerozoic. The eT event has analogs in the Paleozoic biotic evolution, but its strength was really big for the MesozoiceCenozoic evolution. Provisionally, it is suggested to term these two events (P/ T and eT) as quasi-anomalous (Table 2). Generally, the analysis shows that the Big Five mass extinctions were not absolutely unusual events, but, in contrast, these were the other comparable events in the Phanerozoic. Two alternative propositions for further discussions can be formulated. First, the biotic evolution was punctuated by many negative events, all of which should be judged mass extinctions because the recognizable decrease in the number of taxa was always deviation from the norm (in this case, the deﬁnition of the Big Five mass extinctions is not necessary, because the only K/T event deserves being so). Second, the marine biodiversity ﬂuctuated naturally, and not all its decreases were mass extinctions (in this case, mass extinctions should be deﬁned on the basis of their abruptness (see Wang et al., 2014) and/or the critically-low biodiversity levels).
The different evolutionary role of the Big Five mass extinctions is highlighted by their relations to long-term trends (Fig. 5, Table 2). Two events were transformative, namely the eO event that changed the positive trend to the negative trend and the P/T event that, in contrast, changed the negative trend to the positive trend. The Mesozoic mass extinctions (eT and K/T) were decreasing because the biodiversity decreased abruptly, but the positive long-term

Table 2 Characteristics of the Big Five mass extinctions as episodic events.

Event
End-Ordovician Frasnian/Famennian Permian/Triassic End-Triassic Cretaceous/Paleogene

Scale
Ordinary Ordinary Quasi-anomalous Quasi-anomalous Anomalous

“Shape”
Negative Negative Negative Negative Negative

Trend change
Transformative Successive transformative Decreasing Decreasing

trend reestablished soon in the both cases. Finally, the F/F event matches the long-term SilurianePermian trend of biodiversity decrease. It should be noted that despite certain similarity of the mechanisms of the P/T and eT mass extinctions (Van De Schootbrugge and Wignall, 2016), these events were different with regard to the long-term biodiversity trend changes.

4.3. Early Toarcian mass extinction in the new regional brachiopod records
Mass extinctions are not known from the only global, but also regional fossil records. Moreover, they are better documented on particular territories or in particular sections, as well as for particular fossil groups. One of such events is the Early Toarcian mass extinction (Hallam, 1986; Little and Benton, 1995; Harries and Little, 1999; Wignall et al., 2005; Caswell et al., 2009; Vörös et al., 2016; Caswell and Frid, 2017), which was documented in West Europe (Hallam, 1986; Wignall et al., 2005; Gómez and Goy, 2011; Caswell and Coe, 2014; Baeza-Carratalá et al., 2017), the Balkan Peninsula (Ruban et al., 2015), the Caucasus (Ruban, 2004; Ruban and Tyszka, 2005), South America (Aberhan and Fürsich, 1997), and some other places of the world. The new data on the Jurassic brachiopods from two large European regions can be analyzed to reconstruct the regional diversity dynamics of this group and to discuss the event nature of the Early Toarcian mass extinction. Of methodological interest is the different resolution of these reconstructions and the relevant event interpretations.
The high-resolution palaeontological information on stratigraphic ranges of taxa summarized by Höﬂinger (2012) permits very precise reconstruction of the Early Jurassic brachiopod diversity dynamics for the territory of Germany without the Alps. Rare region in the world can boast by the similar precision of the palaeontological information. It is established that the brachiopod diversity was very low in the Hettangian, but further radiation of this fossil group was very strong and culminated in the Pliensbachian (Fig. 6A). However, this general trend was superimposed by many particular positive and negative events. The diversity decreased slightly within the Pliensbachian. Later, the number of brachiopod species decreased by w9 times near the Pliensbachian/ Toarcian boundary, and it remained very low until the end of the Toarcian.
The mass extinction is well visible on the regional diversity curve (Fig. 6A). This event was negative because of the decrease in the taxa number, and it was anomalous because its strength exceeded the strength of all other positive and negative events established regionally in the Early Jurassic. The data presented by Höﬂinger (2012) are limited to the Early Jurassic, and these do not allow to judge about the epoch-long trend established after the mass extinction. However, it is evident that the brachiopod diversity slightly decreased through the Pliensbachian and also slightly increased through the Toarcian. The mass extinction itself led to the substantial decrease in the number of species. In total, this looks like a “restart” of the Early Jurassic radiation. This

384 D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

evidence permits to judge that the Early Toarcian mass extinction shared the features of transformative and decreasing events.
The moderate-resolution palaeontological information on the stratigraphical distribution of brachiopod taxa summarized by Sulser (2016) permits reconstruction of the EarlyeMiddle Jurassic diversity dynamics in the Swiss Jura Mountains. The number of species grew rapidly through the HettangianePliensbachian, reduced signiﬁcantly in the Toarcian, remained low in the Aalenian, and rose again in the Bajocian (Fig. 6B). Most probably, the Early Toarcian mass extinction and the delayed recovery were responsible for the noted diversity reduction. The mass extinction is easily detected as a negative event on the regional diversity curve (Fig. 6B). However, its scale appears to be comparable to that of the Pliensbachian and Bajocian diversiﬁcations. That is why its anomalous character can be questioned. As for the relation to the trend changes, the Toarcian diversity decline led evidently to the “restart” of brachiopod radiation, and, consequently, this was a decreasing event.
The comparison of the event interpretation implies the both similarities and differences between the two regional records. The established similarities prove the strong inﬂuence of the Early Toarcian mass extinction, which resulted in the “restart” of the brachiopod radiation. Interestingly, the decreasing character was also established above to the end-Triassic and Cretaceous/Paleogene mass extinctions (Table 2). It is possible to hypothesize that the Mesozoic evolutionary “forces” were so strong that the mass extinctions could trigger the only reestablishments of the radiation from the lower point, but not trend stabilizations or transformations. Among the differences, one should note that the partly transformative nature of the Early Toarcian mass extinction established in the case of Germany without the Alps is not recorded in the case of the Swiss Jura Mountains. However, this difference is explained methodologically. The stage-long trends are considered in the ﬁrst case, and the epoch-long trends are considered in the second case. Thus, further comparisons of the event interpretations should take into account the resolution of the analyzed curves and the relevant differences of the trend scales.

5. Changes in the number of lithospheric plates
Tectonic processes on the Earth lead to the permanent reorganization of its crust. Lithospheric plates do not only move, but also appear and disappear, participate in assemblies, experience breakups, etc. In the other words, their number has changed throughout the geological history. The relevant considerations were made by several specialists (e.g., Worsley et al., 1984; Bradley, 2011), but the only new-generation plate tectonic reconstructions permit more or less accurate assessment of these changes. Currently, Matthews et al. (2016) presented the curve depicting the dynamics of the lithospheric plate number, and two episodic events on its Late PaleozoiceMesozoic part are considered for the purposes of this study (Fig. 7).
The event l1 took place in the beginning of the Mesozoic (Fig. 7). It was neutral and ordinary because of the absence of changes: the number of plates remained the same for the relatively short time. However, this event marked the remarkable trend change. During the precedent 150 Ma, the number of plates tended to decrease, and this number, in contrast, tended to increase for 150 Ma after the discussed event. The transformative event l1 marked the smallest number of plates on the Earth in its Late PaleozoiceMesozoic history.
The event l2 occurred in the Early Cretaceous (Fig. 7). It was negative because of signiﬁcant plate number decline. This episodic event was anomalous because such strong declines were rare within the analyzed interval of the geological time. Finally, the number of lithospheric plates continued to increase after the event l2, but since the lower point. This means the event was decreasing.
6. Palaeoclimate changes
6.1. End-Smithian (Early Triassic) extreme warmth
The Mesozoic climate was characterized by signiﬁcant warmth (Francis et al., 2005; Price, 2009; Zalasiewicz and Williams, 2012),

A

B

Figure 6. The Early Toarcian mass extinction in the regional brachiopod species diversity dynamics: (A) Germany without the Alps (based on the data of Höﬂinger, 2012), (B) the Swiss Jura Mountains (based on the data of Sulser, 2016).

D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

385

Figure 7. Episodic events in the Late PaleozoiceMesozoic dynamics of the lithospheric plate number (the curve is adapted from Matthews et al., 2016). Abbreviations: l1, l2 e events chosen as examples for the purposes of this paper, l1 eordinary, neutral, transformative, l2e anomalous, negative, decreasing.

although some time spans of this era were even hotter. An example is the episode of extreme warmth is the Early Triassic (Sun et al., 2012; Song et al., 2014; Winguth et al., 2015; MacLeod et al., 2017). Sun et al. (2012) already established several episodic events with the Early Triassic temperature curve, namely, the Dienerian (Late Induan) cooling (termed cooling event I), the Late Smithian (Early Olenekian) thermal maximum, the Early Spathian (Late Olenekian) cooling (termed cooling event II), and the Late Spathian (Late Olenekian) cooling (termed cooling event III). These events were recognized in a way very similar to that proposed in the present paper.
The event analysis of the palaeotemperature curve of Sun et al. (2012) shows the existence of the series of coolings and warmings (Fig. 8). The difference from the original interpretation of Sun et al. (2012) can be explained by the fact the noted authors concentrated on only some signiﬁcant events, whereas ordinary events are also considered in the present paper. Of special interest is the endSmithian extreme warmth. This event was by deﬁnition positive and, surprisingly, ordinary. It was not anomalous (although reached a kind of critically high level of >35 C) because temperature changes of the same strength (by 1e2 C) occurred earlier and later in the Early Triassic. However, this event was anyway important because it marked changes of the trend: the temperature tended to rise during the GriesbachianeSmithian, and it started to decrease in the Spathian. Generally, none of the Early Triassic palaeoclimatic events can be judged anomalous.
6.2. Oi-1 glaciation (Paleogene)
After the outstanding warming in the ﬁrst half of the Paleogene, more moderate climatic conditions established in the second half of this period, when ice existed in the both hemispheres and remarkable glaciations occurred (Zachos et al., 2001; Polyak et al., 2010; Zalasiewicz and Williams, 2012; Walliser et al., 2017). One of the latter was the Oi-1 glaciation that occurred in the very beginning of the Oligocene (Zachos et al., 2001; Lear et al., 2004, 2008; Prothero, 2009; Houben et al., 2012; Ladant et al., 2015). The palaeotemperature curve proposed by Zachos et al. (2001) and based on the oxygen isotope record

interpretation provides sufﬁcient evidence to make general judgments about this event.
The Oi-1 glaciation was not a typical climate ﬂuctuation, because events of this kind did not occur earlier for a long time (Fig. 9). This was a negative event. Its anomalous pattern is unquestionable because the strength of the palaeotemperature decline (by up to 5 C) in the very beginning of the Oligocene exceeded that of the events that took place within the previous 20 Ma-long geological history. The relation to the long-term trends is surprising. Despite the abruptness of the Oi-1 event, the latter did not reverse trends (Fig. 9). The long-term trend of cooling established yet in ﬁrst half of the long Eocene epoch, and the Oi-1 event became a kind of culmination of this tendency. After the minor warming that followed the glaciation, the cooling continued, although slightly. This means that the Oi-1 glaciation was stabilizing event. It also shares the feature of the decreasing event.
7. Discussion
The applications of the proposed classiﬁcation of the episodic events to the analyses of some long-term geological processes allow three general inferences, which are linked to the state of the classiﬁcation itself (1), the reconsideration of the events importance (2), and the further development of comprehensive typology of geological events (3).
(1) The proposed classiﬁcation and the demonstrated approaches of its application to analyses of the curves depicting real geological processes can be criticized for certain simplicity and width (even subjectivity) of possible interpretations. However, two arguments against such a critique are important. First, each new classiﬁcation should be as simple as possible to attract the attention of specialists. From the brief analyses of the previous experience, it appears that the clarity of classiﬁcations and relevant approaches determines their usefulness for further scientiﬁc developments. Of course, mathematical, almost high-tech approaches for episodic event deﬁnition and description would be proposed, but these will only detract the attention of specialists to event analysis (see also above).

386 D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

Figure 8. Episodic events in the Early Triassic climate changes (the palaeotemperature curve is adapted from Sun et al. (2012)).
Second, the applications of the classiﬁcations should reﬂect the pre-existing research practice, i.e., the ways in which the other specialists interpreted events in the geological records. For instance, making strict, mathematically-argued distinctions between ordinary and anomalous events is possible, but palaeobiologists and geochemists have differently understood of what is anomalous and what is not. At least, it is doubtful that the geochemical vision of anomalies will be in agreement with the broad understanding of some mass extinctions as true catastrophes. (2) The analyses of several real long-term geological processes presented in this paper allow different insights into the role of some events. At least, some well-known events traditionally judged outstanding were not either anomalous or provoking trend change (with regard to the long-term succession of changes). For instance, this is the case of the Oi-1 glaciation, which only stabilized the pre-established cooling trend. Moreover, some events marking extreme (critical) levels reached in the course of a given processes were also not so

anomalous or trend-transformative. The examples are the Early Valanginian global sea-level lowstand and the end-Triassic mass extinction. And, in contrast, there were “minor” events that marked signiﬁcant transformations of long-term trends like the Late Campanian eustatic highstand. This evidence means our perception of extreme (critical) events should be separated clearly from their real view on the curves characterizing parameter changes of the relevant process. This ﬁnding determines the utility of the proposed classiﬁcation of the episodic events. Its application allows avoiding errors linked to the subjective judgments of events depending on their perception when scale and relation to trend change are misinterpreted. (3) The episodic events in long-term processes constitute the only one broad class of geological events. Many other classes can be deﬁned via different analyses of the Earth’s history (Table 3). For instance, it has been mentioned already that the Silurian environmental perturbations (Aldridge et al., 1993; Jeppson et al., 1995; Jeppson and Aldridge, 2000; Calner, 2005; Johnson, 2006; Lehnert et al., 2010; Spiridonov, 2017) and the Cretaceous oceanic anoxic events (Schlanger and Jenkyns, 1976; Erba, 2004; Takashima et al., 2006; Faucher et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017) were discrete events to be distinguished from episodic events sensu stricto. Of interest are the events relevant to secular geological changes discussed, particularly, by Eriksson et al. (2013) and Zhai and Santosh (2013). It should be also understood that differences between the classes of events are not strict. For instance, volcano eruptions were discrete events, but it is possible to describe their frequency with a single curve (e.g., Castellano et al., 2004), further interpretation of which will allow recognition of typical episodic process-related events. A kind of “conversion” can be also applied for the purpose of analysis of the oceanic anoxic events e typical discrete events of the Cretaceous. These events can be treated as manifestations of some continuous changes in any single process that can be described with any continuous curve (e.g., the curve of TOC,
d13C, O2 content, etc.). In such a case, they can be analyzed
similarly to the episodic events (as in the case of mass extinctions). However, it should be understood that the discrete events anyway differ essentially from the episodic events.
8. Conclusions
The consideration of the episodic events in long-term geological processes permits making three general conclusions: (1) the episodic events can be classiﬁed according to their parameters

Figure 9. The Oi-1 glaciation in the EoceneeOligocene global climate dynamics (the palaeotemperature curve is adapted from Zachos et al. (2001)).

D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

387

Table 3 Different classes of geological events (preliminary list, classiﬁcation has to be extended). The class considered in this paper is highlighted in bold font.

Class
Point events Episodic events Discrete events
Secular events Exceptional
events

Characteristics of relevant changes
Tiny little and very short geological changes Continuous changes in long-term geological processes Series of changes punctuated geological evolution (e.g., OAEs) Secular geological changes (sensu Eriksson et al., 2013) Events that occurred once and never repeated

(scale, “shape”, and relation to rend change) characterizing their appearance on the curves reﬂecting the long-term geological processes (some other parameters can be also employed for their description); (2) the proposed classiﬁcation can be applied to the analyses of events in real geological processes, which leads to reconsideration of the role of some events earlier believed to be outstanding or, in contrast, ignored; (3) the episodic, processrelated events are one of many classes of geological events, the comprehensive typology of which is yet to be developed.
The present paper demonstrates how the proposed classiﬁcation of episodic events linked to long-term geological processes can be applied to different ﬁelds of geosciences. Different kinds of the geological information with very different spatial scale (including global and regional) and different resolution can be employed for the analysis of episodic events. In the case of palaeontological studies, the both entire biota and particular fossil groups can be analyzed. There may be signiﬁcant importance of this classiﬁcation and its application approach for the analysis of geochemical proxies and, particularly, isotope excursions, and further studies are necessary for the development of the relevant methodology.
Acknowledgements
The author gratefully thanks Prof. M. Santosh for invitation to write a Focus Paper for Geoscience Frontiers, S. Jain (Ethiopia/India) and the other reviewer for their constructive criticism and helpful suggestions, and D.E. Bruno (Italy), C.P. Conrad (Norway), J.M. Gutak (Russia), N.M.M. Janssen (Netherlands), W. Riegraf (Germany), H. Sulser (Switzerland), A.J. van Loon (Spain/China), and many other colleagues for literature support and various discussions.
References
Aberhan, M., Fürsich, F.T., 1997. Diversity analysis of Lower Jurassic bivalves of the Andean Basin and the Pliensbachien-Toarcian mass extinction. Lethaia 29, 181e195.
Aberhan, M., Kiessling, W., 2012. Phanerozoic marine biodiversity: a fresh look at data, methods, patterns and processes. In: Talent, J.A. (Ed.), Earth and Life: Global Biodiversity, Extinction Intervals and Biogeographic Perturbations Through Time. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 3e22.
Aberhan, M., Nurnberg, S., Kiessling, W., 2012. Vision and the diversiﬁcation of Phanerozoic marine invertebrates. Paleobiology 38, 187e204.
Aldridge, R.J., Jeppson, L., Dorning, K.J., 1993. Early Silurian oceanic episodes and events. Journal of the Geological Society, London 150, 501e513.
Alroy, J., Aberhan, M., Bottjer, D.J., Foote, M., Fürsich, F.T., Harries, P.J., Hendy, A.J.W., Holland, S.M., Ivany, L.C., Kiessling, W., Kosnik, M.A., Marshall, C.R., McGowan, A.J., Miller, A.I., Olszewski, T.D., Patzkowsky, M.E., Peters, S.E., Viller, L., Wagner, P.J., Bonuso, N., Borkow, P.S., Brenneis, B., Clapham, M.E., Fall, L.M., Ferguson, C.A., Hanson, V.L., Krug, A.Z., Layou, K.M., Leckey, E.H., Nürnberg, S., Powers, C.M., Sessa, J.A., Simpson, C., Tomasových, A., Visaggi, C.C., 2008. Phanerozoic trends in the global diversity of marine invertebrates. Science 321, 97e100.
Alvarez, L.W., Alvarez, W., Asaro, F., Michel, H.V., 1980. Extraterrestrial cause for the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction. Science 208, 1095e1108.
Baeza-Carratalá, J.F., Reolid, M., García Joral, F., 2017. New deep-water brachiopod resilient assemblage from the South-Iberian Palaeomargin (Western Tethys) and its signiﬁcance for the brachiopod adaptive strategies around the Early Toarcian mass extinction event. Bulletin of Geosciences 92, 233e256.

Bambach, R.K., 2006. Phanerozoic biodiversity and mass extinctions. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 34, 127e155.
Benton, M.J., 1995. Diversiﬁcation and extinction in the history of life. Science 268, 52e58.
Benton, M.J., 2001. Biodiversity on land and in the sea. Geological Journal 36, 211e230.
Blair, T.C., McPherson, J.G., 1999. Grain-size and textural classiﬁcation of coarse sedimentary particles. Journal of Sedimentary Research 69, 6e19.
Blair, T.C., McPherson, J.G., 2009. Processes and forms of alluvial fans. In: Parsons, A.J., Abrahams, A.D. (Eds.), Geomorphology of Desert Environments. Springer, pp. 413e467.
Blott, S.J., Pye, K., 2012. Particle size scales and classiﬁcation of sediment types based on particle size distributions: review and recommended procedures. Sedimentology 59, 2071e2096.
Bond, D.P.G., Grasby, S.E., 2017. On the causes of mass extinctions. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 478, 3e29.
Bradley, D.C., 2011. Secular trends in the geologic record and the supercontinent cycle. Earth-Science Reviews 108, 16e33.
Bruno, D.E., Ruban, D.A., 2017. Something more than boulders: a geological comment on the nomenclature of megaclasts on extraterrestrial bodies. Planetary and Space Science 135, 37e42.
Bruno, D.E., Crowley, B.E., Gutak, Ja.M., Moroni, A., Nazarenko, O.V., Oheim, K.B., Ruban, D.A., Tiess, G., Zorina, S.O., 2014. Paleogeography as geological heritage: developing geosite classiﬁcation. Earth-Science Reviews 138, 300e312.
Calner, M., 2005. A Late Silurian extinction event and anachronistic period. Geology 33, 305e308.
Carroll, A.R., 2017. Xenoconformities and the stratigraphic record of paleoenvironmental change. Geology 45, 639e642.
Castellano, E., Becagli, S., Jouzel, J., Migliori, A., Severi, M., Steffensen, J.P., Traversi, R., Udisti, R., 2004. Volcanic eruption frequency over the last 45 ky as recorded in Epica-Dome C ice core (East Antarctica) and its relationship with climatic changes. Global and Planetary Change 42, 195e205.
Caswell, B.A., Coe, A.L., 2014. The impact of anoxia on pelagic macrofauna during the Toarcian oceanic anoxic Event (Early Jurassic). Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association 125, 383e391.
Caswell, B.A., Frid, C.L.J., 2017. Marine ecosystem resilience during extreme deoxygenation: the Early Jurassic oceanic anoxic event. Oecologia 183, 275e290.
Caswell, B.A., Coe, A.L., Cohen, A.S., 2009. New range data for marine invertebrate species across the early Toarcian (Early Jurassic) mass extinction. Journal of the Geological Society 166, 859e872.
Courtillot, V., 2007. Evolutionary Catastrophes e The Science of Mass Extinction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 173 pp.
Dill, H.G., 2010. The “chessboard” classiﬁcation scheme of mineral deposits: mineralogy and geology from aluminum to zirconium. Earth-Science Reviews 100, 1e420.
Erba, E., 2004. Calcareous nannofossils and Mesozoic oceanic anoxic events. Marine Micropaleontology 52, 85e106.
Eriksson, P.G., Banerjee, S., Catuneanu, O., Corcoran, P.L., Eriksson, K.A., Hiatt, E.E., Laﬂamme, M., Lenhardt, N., Long, D.G.F., Miall, A.D., Mints, M.V., Pufahl, P.K., Sarkar, S., Simpson, E.L., Williams, G.E., 2013. Secular changes in sedimentation systems and sequence stratigraphy. Gondwana Research 24, 468e489.
Erlykin, A.D., Harper, D.A.T., Sloan, T., Wolfendale, A.W., 2017. Mass extinctions over the last 500 myr: an astronomical cause? Palaeontology 60, 159e167.
Erwin, D.H., 2006. Extinction: How Life on Earth Nearly Ended 250 Million Years Ago. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 306 pp.
Fan, J., Peng, P., Melchin, M.J., 2009. Carbon isotopes and event stratigraphy near the Ordovician-Silurian boundary, Yichang, South China. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 276, 160e169.
Farrell, K.M., Harris, B., Mallinson, D.J., Culver, S.J., Riggs, S.R., Pierson, J., SelfTrail, J.M., Lautier, J.C., 2012. Standardizing texture and facies codes for a process-based classiﬁcation of clastic sediment and rock. Journal of Sedimentary Research 82, 364e378.
Faucher, G., Erba, E., Bottini, C., Gambacorta, G., 2017. Calcareous nannoplankton response to the latest Cenomanian oceanic anoxic event 2 perturbation. Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigraﬁa 123, 159e176.
Festa, A., Ogata, K., Pini, G.A., Dilek, Y., Alonso, J.L., 2016. Origin and signiﬁcance of olistostromes in the evolution of orogenic belts: a global synthesis. Gondwana Research 39, 180e203.
Francis, J.E., Frakes, L.A., Syktus, J.I., 2005. Climate Modes of the Phanerozoic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 288 pp.
Galeotti, S., Rusciadelli, G., Sprovieri, M., Lanci, L., Gaudio, A., Pekar, S., 2009. Sealevel control on facies architecture in the Cenomanian-Coniacian Apulian margin (Western Tethys): a record of glacio-eustatic ﬂuctuations during the Cretaceous greenhouse? Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 276, 196e205.
Gómez, J.J., Goy, A., 2011. Warming-driven mass extinction in the Early Toarcian (Early Jurassic) of northern and central Spain. Correlation with other timeequivalent European sections. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 306, 176e195.
Grasby, S.E., McCune, G.E., Beauchamp, B., Galloway, J.M., 2017. Lower Cretaceous cold snaps led to widespread glendonite occurrences in the Sverdrup Basin, Canadian High Arctic. Geological Society of America Bulletin 129, 771e787.
Gutak, J.M., Ruban, D.A., 2013. Catastrophes versus events in the geologic past: how does the scale matter? Cadernos do Laboratorio Xeolóxico de Laxe 37, 163e180.
Hallam, A., 1986. The Pliensbachian and Tithonian extinction events. Nature 319, 765e768.

388 D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

Hallam, A., Wignall, P.B., 1997. Mass Extinctions and Their Aftermath. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 320 pp.
Harries, P.J., Little, C.T.S., 1999. The early Toarcian (Early Jurassic) and the Cenomanian-Turonian (Late Cretaceous) mass extinctions: similarities and contrasts. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 154, 39e66.
Haq, B.U., 2014. Cretaceous eustasy revisited. Global and Planetary Change 113, 44e58.
Haq, B.U., Al-Qahtani, A.M., 2005. Phanerozoic cycles of sea-level change on the Arabian Platform. GeoArabia 10, 127e160.
Haq, B.U., Hardenbol, J., Vail, P.R., 1987. Chronology of ﬂuctuating sea levels since the Triassic. Science 235, 1156e1167.
Höﬂinger, J., 2012. Die Brachiopoden des deutschen Lias. J. Höﬂinger, Röthenbach, 206 pp.
Houben, A.J.P., van Mourik, C.A., Montanari, A., Coccioni, R., Brinkhuis, H., 2012. The Eocene-Oligocene transition: changes in sea level, temperature or both? Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 335e336, 75e83.
Huang, C., Tong, J., Hinnov, L., Chen, Z.Q., 2011. Did the great dying of life take 700 k.y.? Evidence from global astronomical correlation of the Permian-Triassic boundary interval. Geology 39, 779e782.
Immenhauser, A., Matthews, R.K., 2004. Albian sea-level cycles in Oman: the ‘Rosetta Stone’ approach. GeoArabia 9, 11e46.
Jeppson, L., Aldridge, R.J., 2000. Ludlow (late Silurian) oceanic episodes and events. Journal of the Geological Society, London 157, 1137e1148.
Jeppson, L., Aldridge, R.J., Dorning, K.J., 1995. Wenlock (Silurian) oceanic episodes and events. Journals of the Geological Society, London 152, 487e498.
Johnson, M.E., 2006. Relationship of Silurian sea-level ﬂuctuations to oceanic episodes and events. GFF 128, 115e121.
Kominz, M.A., Browning, J.V., Miller, K.G., Sugarman, P.J., Mizintseva, S., Scotese, C.R., 2008. Late Cretaceous to Miocene sea-level estimates from the New Jersey and Delaware coastal plain boreholes: an error analysis. Basin Research 20, 211e226.
Ladant, J.-B., Donnadieu, Y., Lefebvre, V., Dumas, C., 2015. The respective role of atmospheric carbon dioxide and orbital parameters on ice sheet evolution at the Eocene-Oligocene transition. Paleoceanography 29, 810e823.
Larson, R.L., 1991. Geological consequences of superplumes. Geology 19, 963e966. Lear, C.H., Rosenthal, Y., Coxall, H.K., Wilson, P.A., 2004. Late Eocene to early
Miocene ice sheet dynamics and the global carbon cycle. Paleoceanography 19, 1e11. Lear, C.H., Bailey, T.R., Pearson, P.N., Coxall, H.K., Rosenthal, Y., 2008. Cooling and ice growth across the Eocene-Oligocene transition. Geology 36, 251e254. Lehnert, O., Männik, P., Joachimski, M.M., Calner, M., Frýda, J., 2010. Palaeoclimate perturbations before the Sheinwoodian glaciation: a trigger for extinctions during the ’Ireviken Event’. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 296, 320e331. Li, M., Ogg, J., Zhang, Y., Huang, C., Hinnov, L., Chen, Z.-Q., Zou, Z., 2016. Astronomical tuning of the end-Permian extinction and the Early Triassic Epoch of South China and Germany. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 441, 10e25. Li, Y.-X., Montañez, I.P., Liu, Z., Ma, L., 2017. Astronomical constrains on global carbon-cycle perturbation during Oceanic Anoxic Event 2 (OAE2). Earth and Planetary Science Letters 462, 35e46. Little, C.T.S., Benton, M.J., 1995. Early Jurassic mass extinction: a global long-term event. Geology 23, 495e498. Lokier, S.W., Al Junaibi, M., 2016. The petrographic description of carbonate facies: are we all speaking the same language? Sedimentology 63, 1843e1885. MacLeod, K.G., Quinton, P.C., Bassett, D.J., 2017. Document warming and increased aridity during the earliest Triassic in the Karoo Basin, South Africa. Geology 45, 483e486. Matthews, K.J., Seton, M., Müller, R.D., 2012. A global-scale plate reorganization event at 105 e 100 Ma. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 355e356, 283e298. Matthews, K.J., Maloney, K.T., Zahirovic, S., Williams, S.E., Seton, M., Müller, R.D., 2016. Global plate boundary evolution and kinematics since the late Paleozoic. Global and Planetary Change 146, 226e250. Maurer, F., van Buchem, F.S.P., Eberli, G.P., Pierson, B.J., Raven, M.J., Larsen, P.-H., AlHusseini, M.I., Vincent, B., 2013. Late Aptian long-lived glacio-eustatic lowstand recorded on the Arabian Plate. Terra Nova 25, 87e94. Mayhew, P.J., Jenkins, G.B., Benton, T.G., 2008. A long-term association between global temperature and biodiversity, origination and extinction in the fossil record. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 275, 47e53. Melott, A.L., Bambach, R.K., 2011a. Document A ubiquitous w62-Myr periodic ﬂuctuation superimposed on general trends in fossil biodiversity. I. Documentation. Paleobiology 37, 92e112. Melott, A.L., Bambach, R.K., 2011b. A ubiquitous w62-Myr periodic ﬂuctuation superimposed on general trends in fossil biodiversity. II. Evolutionary dynamics associated with periodic ﬂuctuation in marine diversity. Paleobiology 37, 383e408. Melott, A.L., Bambach, R.K., 2014. Analysis of periodicity of extinction using the 2012 geological timescale. Paleobiology 40, 177e196. Merle, O., 2011. A simple continental rift classiﬁcation. Tectonophysics 513, 88e95. Miall, A.D., 2016. The valuation of unconformities. Earth-Science Reviews 163, 22e71. Miller, K.G., Kominz, M.A., Browning, J.V., Wright, J.D., Mountain, G.S., Katz, M.E., Sugarman, P.J., Cramer, B.S., Christie-Blick, N., Pekar, S.F., 2005. The Phanerozoic record of global sea-level change. Science 310, 1293e1298. Moros, M., Andersen, T.J., Schulz-Bull, D., Hausler, K., Bunke, D., Snowball, I., Kotilainen, A., Zillen, L., Jensen, J.B., Kabel, K., Hand, I., Leipe, T., Lougheed, B.C.,

Wagner, B., Arz, H.W., 2017. Towards an event stratigraphy for Baltic Sea sediments deposited since AD 1900: approaches and challenges. Boreas 46, 129e142. Newell, N.D., 1967. Revolutions in the history of life. Geological Society of America Special Paper 89, 63e91. Ogg, J.G., Ogg, G.M., Gradstein, F.M., 2016. A Concise Geologic Time Scale 2016. Elsevier, Amsterdam. Peacock, D.C.P., Nixon, C.W., Rotevatn, A., Sanderson, D.J., Zuluaga, L.F., 2016. Glossary of fault and other fracture networks. Journal of Structural Geology 92, 12e29. Peacock, D.C.P., Nixon, C.W., Rotevatn, A., Sanderson, D.J., Zuluaga, L.F., 2017a. Interacting faults. Journal of Structural Geology 97, 1e22. Peacock, D.C.P., Dimmen, V., Rotevatn, A., Sanderson, D.J., 2017b. A broader classiﬁcation of damage zones. Journal of Structural Geology 102, 179e192. Peropadre, C., Liesa, C.L., Melendez, N., 2013. High-frequency, moderate to highamplitude sea-level oscillations during the late Early Aptian: insights into the Mid-Aptian event (Galve sub-basin, Spain). Sedimentary Geology 294, 233e250. Peters, S.E., Foote, M., 2001. Biodiversity in the Phanerozoic: a reinterpretation. Paleobiology 27, 583e601. Plyusnina, E.E., Ruban, D.A., Conrad, C.P., dos Anjos Zerfass, G. de S., Zerfass, H., 2016. Long-term eustatic cyclicity in the Paleogene: a critical assessment. Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association 127, 425e434. Polyak, L., Alley, R.B., Andrews, J.T., Brigham-Grette, J., Cronin, T.M., Darby, D.A., Dyke, A.S., Fitzpatrick, J.J., Funder, S., Holland, M., Jennings, A.E., Miller, G.H., O’Regan, M., Savelle, J., Serreze, M., St John, K., White, J.W.C., Wolff, E., 2010. History of sea ice in the Arctic. Quaternary Science Reviews 29, 1757e1778. Price, G.D., 2009. Mesozoic climates. In: Gornitz, V. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Paleoclimatology and Ancient Environments. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 554e559. Prothero, D.R., 2009. Paleogene climates. In: Gornitz, V. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Paleoclimatology and Ancient Environments. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 728e733. Purdy, E.G., 2008. Comparison of taxonomic diversity, strontium isotope and sealevel patterns. International Journal of Earth Sciences 97, 651e664. Raup, D.W., Sepkoski, J.J., 1982. Mass extinctions in the marine fossil record. Science 215, 1501e1503. Ruban, D.A., 2004. Diversity dynamics of Early-Middle Jurassic brachiopods of Caucasus, and the Pliensbachian-Toarcian mass extinction. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 49, 275e282. Ruban, D.A., 2006. Sobytijnyj analiz v naukakh o Zemle. UPL RGU, Rostov-na-Donu, 18 pp. (in Russian). Ruban, D.A., 2015a. Splash-like marine biodiversity additions after the Cambrian. Geoloski anali Balkanskoga poluostrva 76, 1e9. Ruban, D.A., 2015b. Mesozoic long-term eustatic cycles and their uncertain hierarchy. Geoscience Frontiers 6, 503e511. Ruban, D.A., Tyszka, J., 2005. Diversity dynamics and mass extinctions of the EarlyMiddle Jurassic foraminifers: a record from the Northwestern Caucasus. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 222, 329e343. Ruban, D.A., Conrad, C.P., van Loon, A.J., 2010a. The challenge of reconstructing the Phanerozoic sea level and the Paciﬁc Basin tectonics. Geologos 16, 235e243. Ruban, D.A., Zorina, S.O., Conrad, C.P., 2010b. No global-scale transgressive-regressive cycles in the Thanetian (Paleocene): evidence from interregional correlation. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 295, 226e235. Ruban, D.A., Zorina, S.O., Conrad, C.P., Afanasieva, N.I., 2012. In quest of Paleocene global-scale transgressions and regressions: constraints from a synthesis of regional trends. Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association 123, 7e18. Ruban, D.A., Radulovic, B.V., Radulovic, V.J., 2015. Diversity dynamics of Early and Middle Jurassic brachiopods in the Getic and Danubian tectonic units of eastern Serbia: regional versus global patterns. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 425, 97e108. Rudwick, M.J.S., 2008. Worlds Before Adam: The Reconstruction of Geohistory in the Age of Reform. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 614 pp. Sallam, E.S., Ruban, D.A., 2017. Palaeogeographical type of the geological heritage of Egypt: a new evidence. Journal of African Earth Sciences 129, 739e750. Schlanger, S.O., Jenkyns, H.C., 1976. Cretaceous oceanic anoxic events: causes and consequences. Geologie en Mijnbouw 55, 179e184. Sepkoski, J.J., 1993. Ten years in the library: new data conﬁrm paleontological patterns. Paleobiology 19, 43e51. Sepkoski, J.J., 1997. Biodiversity: past, present, and future. Journal of Paleontology 71, 533e539. Sepkoski Jr., J.J., 2002. A compendium fossil marine animal genera. Bulletins of American Paleontology 363, 1e560. Sepkoski, J.J., Bambach, R.K., Raup, D.M., Valentine, J.W., 1981. Phanerozoic marine diversity and fossil record. Nature 293, 435e437. Song, H., Wignall, P.B., Chu, D., Tong, J., Sun, Y., Song, H., He, W., Tian, L., 2014. Anoxia/high temperature double whammy during the Permian-Triassic marine crisis and its aftermath. Scientiﬁc Reports 4, 4132. Spiridonov, A., 2017. Recurrence and cross recurrence plots reveal the onset of the Mulde event (Silurian) in the abundance data for Baltic conodonts. Journal of Geology 125, 381e398. Stanley, S.M., 2007. An analysis of the history of marine animal diversity. Paleobiology 33 (suppl.), 1e55. Sulser, H., 2016. Die fossilen Brachiopoden der Schweiz und der umliegenden Gebiete. Paläontologisches Institut und Museum der Universität Zürich, Zürich, 454 pp.

D.A. Ruban / Geoscience Frontiers 9 (2018) 377e389

389

Sun, Y., Joachimski, M.M., Wignall, P.B., Yan, C., Chen, Y., Jiang, H., Wang, L., Lai, X., 2012. Lethally hot temperatures during the Early Triassic greenhouse. Science 338, 366e370.
Takashima, R., Nishi, H., Huber, T., Leckie, M.R., 2006. Greenhouse world and the Mesozoic ocean. Oceanography 19, 64e74.
Terry, J.P., Goff, J., 2014. Megaclasts: proposed revised nomenclature at the coarse end of the Udden-Wentworth gain-size scale for sedimentary particles. Journal of Sedimentary Research 84, 192e197.
Twitchett, R.J., 2006. The palaeoclimatology, palaeoecology and palaeoenvironmental analysis of mass extinction events. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 232, 190e213.
Van Daele, M., Meyer, I., Moernaut, J., De Decker, S., Verschuren, D., De Batist, M., 2017. A revised classiﬁcation and terminology for stacked and amalgamated turbidites in environments dominated by (hemi)pelagic sedimentation. Sedimentary Geology 357, 72e82.
Van De Schootbrugge, B., Wignall, P.B., 2016. A tale of two extinctions: converging end-Permian and end-Triassic scenarios. Geological Magazine 153, 332e354.
Vörös, A., Kocsis, Á.T., Pälfy, J., 2016. Demise of the last two spire-bearing brachiopod orders (Spiriferinida and Athyridida) at the Toarcian (Early Jurassic) extinction event. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 457, 233e241.
Walliser, O.H., 1986. The IGCP Project 216 “Global Biological Events in Earth History”. Springer, Berlin, pp. 1e4. Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences 8.
Walliser, O.H., 1995. Patterns and causes of global events. In: Walliser, O.H. (Ed.), Global Events and Event Stratigraphy in the Phanerozoic. Springer, Berlin, pp. 7e19.
Walliser, O. (Ed.), 1996. Global Events and Event Stratigraphy in the Phanerozoic. Springer, Berlin, 333 pp.
Walliser, E.O., Lohmann, G., Niezgodzki, I., Schöne, B.R., 2017. Inter-annual climate variability in Europe during the Oligocene icehouse. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 475, 140e153.
Wang, Y., Sadler, P.M., Shen, S.-Z., Erwin, D.H., Zhang, Y.-C., Wang, X.-D., Wang, W., Crowley, J.L., Henderson, C.M., 2014. Quantifying the process and abruptness of the end-Permian mass extinction. Paleobiology 40, 113e129.
Wang, S.C., Zimmerman, A.E., McVeigh, B.S., Everson, P.J., Wong, H., 2012. Conﬁdence intervals for the duration of a mass extinction. Paleobiology 38, 265e277.
Wiese, F., Wood, C.J., Kaplan, U., 2004. 20 years of event stratigraphy in NW Germany: advances and open questions. Acta Geologica Polonica 54, 639e656.

Wignall, P.B., Newton, R.J., Little, C.T.S., 2005. The timing of paleoenvironmental change and cause-and-effect relationships during the Early Jurassic mass extinction in Europe. American Journal of Science 305, 1014e1032.
Winguth, A.M.E., Shields, C.A., Winguth, C., 2015. Transition into a hothouse world at the Permian-Triassic boundary e a model study. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 440, 316e327.
Worsley, T.R., Nance, D., Moody, J.B., 1984. Global tectonics and eustasy for the past 2 billion years. Marine Geology 58, 373e400.
Zachos, J., Pagani, M., Sloan, L., Thomas, E., Billups, K., 2001. Trends, rhythms, and aberrations in global climate 65 Ma to present. Science 292, 686e693.
Zaffos, A., Finnegan, S., Peters, S.E., 2017. Plate tectonic regulation of global marine animal diversity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 114, 5653e5658.
Zalasiewicz, J., Williams, M., 2012. The Goldilocks Planet: The Four Billion Year Story of Earth’s Climate. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 303 pp.
Zhai, M., Santosh, M., 2013. Metallogeny of the North China Craton: link with secular changes in the evolving Earth. Gondwana Research 24, 275e297.
Zorina, S.O., Dzyuba, O.S., Shurygin, B.N., Ruban, D.A., 2008. How global are the JurassiceCretaceous unconformities? Terra Nova 20, 341e346.
Dmitry A. Ruban holds PhD from the University of Pretoria (South Africa) and CGMS from the Rostov State University (Russia). He is Associate Professor at the Southern Federal University (Russia) where has taught various courses on the Earth Sciences and tourism & hospitality. His research interests include stratigraphy, palaeobiology, plate tectonic reconstructions, event analysis, and geoheritage studies. He also conducts active research in tourism, economics and management, philosophy of science, and education. He has w100 articles published in international journals, and the total number of his published works exceeds 850. He is a member of the Swiss Association of Energy Geoscientists (Switzerland), the International Agency for Minerals Policy (Austria), and the editorial boards of 4 international journals.

