Current Biology Vol 20 No 22 R956

Features

Rapid baseline changes challenge biodiversity insights

Human developments, climate change and other factors present an increasing problem for efforts to conserve and protect native species. Nigel Williams reports.

While policymakers were meeting in Nagoya to try to thrash out a new deal to preserve biodiversity over the next decade, a group of researchers were meeting at the Royal Society in London to highlight the complexity of the issues, in the face of human encroachment on habitats and the perils of climate change.
“From the pioneering explorations of Joseph Banks to the present day, a great deal has been learnt about the extent, distribution and stability of biological diversity in the world,” write Anne Magurran, at the University of St Andrews,

Scotland, and Maria Dornelas of the University of Aveiro, Portugal in the introduction to the studies. “We now know that diverse life can be found even in the most inhospitable places,” they say. But they highlight the dynamics of change “We have also learned that biological diversity changes through time over both large and small temporal scales. These natural changes track environmental conditions and reflect ecological and evolutionary processes. However, anthropogenic activities, including overexploitation, habitat loss and climate change, are currently causing profound

transformations in ecosystems and unprecedented loss of biological diversity.”
The researchers emphasise the problems facing scientists and policymakers looking at biodiversity and how to maintain it in the face of change.
“Landscape transformation by humans is virtually ubiquitous, with several suggestions being made that the world’s biomass should now be classified according to the extent and nature of this transformation,” writes Steven Chown at Stellenbosch University. “Even those areas that are thought to have a relatively limited human footprint have experienced substantial biodiversity change,” he says. “This is true of both marine and

Shifting: The spectacular flora of South Africa appears to be undergoing substantial changes as a result of a warming climate. (Photo: Chris Mattison/Photolibrary.)

Magazine R957

terrestrial systems of southern Africa, a region of high biodiversity and including several large conservation areas. Global change drivers have had substantial effects across many levels of the biological hierarchy,” he says. His work has focused on terrestrial ecosystems and the interactions among drivers, such as between climate change and invasion, and between changing fire regimes and invasion. “Carbon dioxide fertilisation is having a much larger impact on terrestrial systems than perhaps commonly acknowledged,” he says. He highlights the need to address the changes when considering issues of biodiversity. “Temporal changes in biodiversity, and the seeming failure of institutional attempts to address them, underline a growing polarisation of world views, which is hampering efforts to address urgent conservation needs.”
Researchers and policymakers have been increasingly drawn to events at the poles, where climate change is appearing to have already more dramatic effects than at more central latitudes. “Ecologists have long been fascinated by the flora and fauna of extreme environments,” write Andrew Clarke and J. Alistair Crame at the British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. “Physiological studies have revealed the extent to which lifestyle is constrained by low temperature but there is as yet no consensus on why the diversity of polar assemblages is so much lower than many tropical assemblages.” The evolution of marine faunas at high latitudes has been influenced strongly by oceanic cooling during the Cenozoic and the associated onset of continental glaciations, the researchers write.
“Glaciation eradicated many shallow-water habitats, especially in the southern hemisphere, and the cooling has led to widespread extinction in some groups. While environmental conditions at glacial maxima would have been very different from those existing today, fossil evidence indicates that some lineages extend back well into the Cenozoic.”
Oscillations of the ice sheet will have periodically eradicated and exposed continental shelf habitat, and a “full understanding of evolutionary dynamics at high latitude requires better knowledge of the links between faunas of the shelf, slope and deep sea.”

Molecular techniques to produce phylogenies, coupled with further palaeontological work to root these phylogenies in time, will be essential to further progress and help determine the changes that have taken place in the past, long before human influence.
One group of researchers reported a neglected area of biodiversity: the atmosphere. “The variation of life has predominantly been studied on land and in water,” write Ann Womack and colleagues at the University of Oregon, Eugene. But “there is resurgent interest in the distribution of life in the atmosphere and the processes that underlie patterns in this distribution.” They reviewed the current state of knowledge about the biodiversity and biogeography of the atmosphere, with an emphasis on microorganisms, the numerically dominant forms of aerial life. They suggested that the atmosphere is a habitat for microorganisms, and not purely a conduit for terrestrial and aquatic life. Building on a history of research in terrestrial and aquatic systems, they explored biodiversity patterns that are likely to play an important role in the emerging field.
But the relentless threat to terrestrial and marine organisms dominated the meeting. “Continuing downward trends in the population sizes of many species, in the conservation status of threatened species, and in the quality, extent and connectedness of habitats are now of increasing concern,” write Geogina Mace at Imperial College London and colleagues in London and Australia. “Identifying the attributes of declining populations will help predict how biodiversity will be impacted and guide conservation actions. However, the drivers of biodiversity declines have changed over time and average trends in abundance or distributional change hide significant variation among species.”
The authors argue that, while some populations are declining rapidly, the majority remain relatively stable and others are increasing. They describe some of the changing drivers of population and geographic range change, and identify biological and geographical correlates of winners and losers in two large datasets covering local population sizes of vertebrates since 1970 and the

distributions of Galliform birds over the last two centuries.
“We found weak evidence for ecological and biological traits being predictors of local decline in range or abundance, but stronger evidence for the role of local anthropogenic threats and environmental change,” they say.
Rates of decline documented in cross-species and population datasets provide some of the most compelling evidence about the changing rates of global biodiversity loss. But the average rates reported hide significant variation among species and populations,” they write.
“Moreover, our findings that the identity of the most rapidly declining species varies over time, and the fact that we did not identify consistent ecological or life-history predictors of change, together suggest a strong role for local environmental change and threats in determining trends.”
Further disaggregation of these data will allow better insights into the processes that could next cause major population declines and range loss. Also a better understanding of the interactions among threats, environmental change, species traits and habitat conservation could provide a basis for more efficient proactive conservation planning, they say.
“The planet has always been changing: current patterns of biodiversity are the result of past environmental conditions and ecological and evolutionary constraints,” write Magurran and Dornelas. However, current rates and sources of change pose scientists and people in general with new challenges. “We must incorporate change into the way we view biodiversity, and learn to distinguish between necessary change and change we should aim to avoid or at the very least mitigate,” they write.
“The mass extinction currently under way, caused by overexploitation of natural resources, needs to worry us.” Environmental change has always been prevalent, and has helped shape biodiversity patterns of today. But never before has a single species driven such profound changes to the habitats, composition and climate of the planet. “To deal with the challenges raised by these large-scale and intense modifications of the planet, we need to develop quantitative tools to understand change,” they say.

