Dispatch R85

Paleontology: A Cock’s Comb on a

mature adult based on a bivariate

Duck-Billed Dinosaur

analysis with several other skulls of the same species. And, although this may

be the case, the age estimate will have

A soft tissue structure has been discovered on the head of the duck-billed dinosaur Edmontosaurus. Its similarity to a cock’s comb and other sexually dimorphic structures of birds suggests that potential sexual signals existed in these extinct animals.

to be re-checked at some point with a histological analysis of the bones, because as we know sexual maturity and skeletal maturity do not coincide in dinosaurs [11]. Skeletal maturity

can only be conﬁdently assessed by

John R. Horner

hadrosaurs Gryposaurus,

a histological analysis of a dinosaur’s

Edmontosaurus, and Saurolophus

long bones and their possession of

Dinosaurs are famous for their

[6,9,10], but the discovery of Bell and an external fundamental system. Size

elaborate, often bizarre, head-gear

colleagues [5] is the ﬁrst to reveal the alone is not a reliable age indicator [12].

such as horns and neck shields,

impression of a soft-tissue, three-

However, because sexual maturity

frontal-parietal domes with facial nodes dimensional structure on the head of and skeletal maturity occur at different

and spikes, or elaborate solid or hollow a dinosaur.

times it is likely that the comb-like

nasal crests. Each of these ornamental Utilizing computerized tomographic structure was present and possibly

structures is constructed of bony

scanning Bell and colleagues [5] were fully developed by the time the

tissues, some of which undergo

able to determine that the soft tissue individual reached sexual maturity,

elaborate shape change during

structure was a bilaterally symmetrical because, as Bell et al. [5] discuss, these

development [1–3] (Figure 1).

ﬂeshy structure that contained no

structures may well have signaled the

Interestingly, some taxa very closely evidence of bone tissue; and it

condition of the individual, as they do in

related to ornamented species lack

covered the entire dorsal surface of

birds [13,14], or sperm quality as in

evidence of bony features (Figure 1D), the parietal region, from the orbits back some avian males [15]. As noted by the

and this peculiarity has puzzled

to the caudal end of the skull. The

authors, the presence of this cock-like

researchers trying to understand the researchers described the structure as comb attests to the importance of

function of these bizarre structures [4]. likely to have been ‘‘soft and supple,’’ social signaling, and the possibility

In a recent issue of Current Biology,

and was therefore probably very

of sexual dimorphism, and therefore

Philip Bell and colleagues [5] report the similar to the combs of the avian genus sexual selection among dinosaurs

discovery of a soft tissue comb on the Gallus.

[4,16–18]. Sexual dimorphism has not

head of the duck-billed dinosaur

The authors [5] hypothesize that their been conclusively demonstrated in any

Edmontosaurus regalis, a hadrosaur specimen was that of a skeletally

dinosaur taxon and so a discovery such

that lacked cranial bony ornamentation.

This discovery suggests that other

minimally or non-ornamented dinosaur

taxa may also have sported ﬂeshy

excrescent structures.

Occasionally, articulated dinosaur

skeletons are found with associated

impressions of their skin. The

carcasses of these dinosaurs had to

have been covered with ﬁne sediment

prior to the skin being degraded,

and as a result even after soft-tissue

degradation, the surface texture

impressions remained in the sediment

envelope. Careful preparation of the

rock from around the skeleton often

exposes these impressions, some of

which reveal exquisite detail of scale

patterns and accessory ornaments [6].

Numerous hadrosaur taxa, including

Edmontosaurus have been found with

skin impressions, some of which were

clearly ornamental. Impressions of soft

tissue body ornamentations, such as

midline frills or spines (‘midline feature scales’ [6]) running down the backs of dinosaurs are rare but known for a few taxa, including the sauropod Diplodocus [7], the primitive horned

Figure 1. The skulls of four hadrosaurs.
(A) Subadult Hypacrosaurus stebingeri lacking the hollow narial crest present in the adult (B). Arrow on (B) points out the inﬂated narial crest. (C) Adult Prosaurolophus c.f. maximus showing its incipient nasal crest (arrow). (D) Edmontosaurus annectens lacking a nasal crest. Dotted line denotes area where the soft tissue comb would exist. Skulls are to scale.

dinosaur Psittacosaurus [8] and the

Edmontosaurus skull is 130 cm in length.

Current Biology Vol 24 No 2 R86

as this provides the ﬁrst evidence that some dinosaurs may have had potentially dimorphic features that may also have signaled the condition of the male individual. In any case, this is an interesting and signiﬁcant discovery as it suggests the potential that dinosaurs in general, including those that possessed bony ornamental structures, may have sported additional excrescent features such as wattles, snoods, or other normal caruncular features. And, that these structures provided the same visual cues that are evident in extant birds, including ﬂuctuating asymmetry where an asymmetrical structure would signal abnormalities to a potential mate [19].
We have known for more than three decades that dinosaurs were very social animals, nesting in colonies, caring for their young, and living in gigantic aggregations. We know that many taxa invested tremendous resources in bony visual display organs, like the magniﬁcent shield of Triceratops, and now we can hypothesize, based on this new discovery, that cranial ornamentations were probably panoptic. It is not surprising that dinosaurs possessed soft tissue combs as many species invested so many resources into their bony ornamentations, but in

paleontology, where evidence is trump, this discovery offers the ﬁrst possibility of sexual dimorphism and provides new behavioral avenues to consider. It also adds yet another character to the ever-growing list of shared derived traits uniting birds and extinct dinosaurs.
References 1. Horner, J.R., and Goodwin, M.B. (2006). Major cranial changes during Triceratops ontogeny. Proc. R. Soc. B 273, 2757–2761. 2. Horner, J.R., and Goodwin, M.B. (2009). Extreme cranial ontogeny in the Upper Cretaceous dinosaur Pachycephalosaurus. PLoS ONE 4, e7626. 3. Schott, R.K., Evans, D.C., Goodwin, M.B., Horner, J.R., Brown, C.M., and Longrich, N.L. (2011). Cranial ontogeny in Stegoceras validum (Dinosauria: Pachycephalosauridae): a quantitative model of pachycephalosaur dome growth and variation. PLoS ONE 6, e21092. 4. Padian, K., and Horner, J.R. (2011). The evolution of ‘bizarre structures’ in dinosaurs: biomechanics, sexual selection, social selection or species recognition? J. Zool. 283, 3–17. 5. Bell, P.R., Fanti, F., Currie, P.J., and Arbour, V.M. (2014). A mummiﬁed duck-billed dinosaur with a soft-tissue cock’s comb. Curr. Biol. 24, 70–75. 6. Bell, P.R. (2012). Standardized terminology and potential taxonomic utility for hadrosaurid skin impressions: a case study for Saurolophus from Canada and Mongolia. PLoS ONE 7, e31295. 7. Czerkas, S.A. (1992). Discovery of dermal spines reveals a new look for sauropod dinosaurs. Geology 20, 1068–1070. 8. Mayr, G., Peters, D.S., Plodowski, G., and Vogel, O. (2002). Bristle-like integumentary structures at the tail of the horned dinosaur Psittacosaurus. Naturwissenschaften 89, 361–365.

9. Lambe, L.M. (1914). On the forelimb of a carnivorous dinosaur from the Belly River Formation of Alberta, and a new genus of Ceratopsia from the same horizon, with remarks on the integument of some Cretaceous herbivorous dinosaurs. Ottawa Nat. 27, 129–135.
10. Horner, J.R. (1984). A ‘segmented’ tail frill in a species of hadrosaurian dinosaur. J. Paleontol. 58, 270–271.
11. Lee, A.H., and Werning, S. (2008). Sexual maturity in growing dinosaurs does not ﬁt reptilian growth models. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 582–587.
12. Horner, J.R., and Rife, J.M. (2013). Ontogenetic assessment of dinosaurs using cranial and postcranial osteohistology. J. Vert. Paleontol. Abs. 145.
13. Hamilton, W.D., and Zuk, M. (1982). Heritable true ﬁtness and bright birds: a role for parasites? Science 218, 384–387.
14. Møller, A.P. (1999). Developmental stability is related to ﬁtness. Am. Nat. 153, 556–560.
15. Navara, K.J., Anderson, E.M., and Edwards, M.L. (2012). Comb size and color relate to sperm quality: a test of the phenotype-linked fertility hypothesis. Behav. Ecol. 23, 1036–1041.
16. Darwin, C. (1859). The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection (London: J. Murray Press).
17. Darwin, C. (1871). The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex (London: J. Murray Press).
18. Padian, K., and Horner, J.R. (2011). The deﬁnition of sexual selection and its implications for dinosaurian biology. J. Zool. 283, 23–27.
19. Van Valen, L. (1962). A study of ﬂuctuating asymmetry. Evolution 16, 125–142.
Museum of the Rockies, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA. E-mail: jhorner@montana.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.12.007

