Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Developmental Biology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/developmentalbiology
Evolution of Developmental Control Mechanisms
Comparative developmental analysis of Drosophila and Tribolium reveals conserved and diverged roles of abrupt in insect wing evolution
Padmapriyadarshini Ravisankar, Yi-Ting Lai, Nagraj Sambrani, Yoshinori Tomoyasu n
Department of Biology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, USA

article info
Article history: Received 25 June 2015 Received in revised form 7 December 2015 Accepted 9 December 2015 Available online 11 December 2015
Keywords: Morphological evolution Insect wings Abrupt Notch signal Tribolium Drosophila

abstract
Morphological innovation is a fundamental process in evolution, yet its molecular basis is still elusive. Acquisition of elytra, highly modiﬁed beetle forewings, is an important innovation that has driven the successful radiation of beetles. Our RNAi screening for candidate genes has identiﬁed abrupt (ab) as a potential key player in elytron evolution. In this study, we performed a series of RNA interference (RNAi) experiments in both Tribolium and Drosophila to understand the contributions of ab to the evolution of beetle elytra. We found that (i) ab is essential for proper wing vein patterning both in Tribolium and Drosophila, (ii) ab has gained a novel function in determining the unique elytron shape in the beetle lineage, (iii) unlike Hippo and Insulin, other shape determining pathways, the shape determining function of ab is speciﬁc to the elytron and not required in the hindwing, (iv) ab has a previously undescribed role in the Notch signal-associated wing formation processes, which appears to be conserved between beetles and ﬂies. These data suggest that ab has gained a new function during elytron evolution in beetles without compromising the conserved wing-related functions. Gaining a new function without losing evolutionarily conserved functions may be a key theme in the evolution of morphologically novel structures.
& 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Morphological innovation is a fundamental process in evolution, yet the molecular mechanism underlying the evolution of morphologically novel structures remains elusive. Insect wings show stunning diversity in shape, color, and texture, and thus serve as an excellent model to study the molecular basis of morphological innovation. Coleoptera (beetles) is one of the most successful animal groups on the planet, accounting for over 20 percent of extant animals (Grimaldi and Engel, 2005; Hunt et al., 2007). Innovation of elytra, highly sclerotized and modiﬁed (namely “exoskeletalized” (Tomoyasu et al., 2009)) forewings, is an important trait driving the successful radiation of beetles. Elytra serve as body covers to protect beetles against various mechanical stresses, dehydration, and predation. By using the red ﬂour beetle, Tribolium castaneum, as a model system, we have previously shown that this heavy exoskeletalization of the beetle forewings has been achieved by multiple co-options of the exoskeletalization pathways into the conserved wing gene network (Tomoyasu et al., 2009). However, elytra are not simply hardened forewings. They have acquired many morphologically distinct features, such as a
n Corresponding author. E-mail address: tomoyay@miamioh.edu (Y. Tomoyasu).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.12.006 0012-1606/& 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

unique parallel vein pattern and several cuticular structures responsible for the tight sealing of left and right elytra as well as between elytra and body walls (Crowson, 1981). Another crucial innovation that has occurred in the elytron relates to their unique shape. Insect wings typically have an anteriorly expanded shape, with their apexes positioned anterior to the midline along the proximal-distal (PD) axis (e.g. Fig. 3B). In contrast, the elytron has its apex positioned more posteriorly, and the margin posterior to the apex forms a very straight line (Figs. 2A, 3A). The straight posterior margin allows the left and right elytra to meet on the dorsal side of the beetle without a gap, forming a tight seal through an interlocking mechanism (see the arrow in Fig. 2A for the tight sealing between two elytra). This tight sealing between left and right elytra is critical for their protective function (Crowson, 1981). These elytron-speciﬁc traits are absent (or very primitive) in protocoleopteran beetloids (Kukalova, 1969), and have been acquired uniquely in the lineage leading to true coleopteran insects (Crowson, 1981; Grimaldi and Engel, 2005). The molecular mechanisms responsible for the acquisition of these elytron-speciﬁc traits have never been explored.
The molecular and genetic basis of insect wing modiﬁcation is best understood in a dipteran insect, Drosophila melanogaster, providing us with a framework to approach the molecular mechanisms underlying the evolution of the elytron-speciﬁc traits. In the lineage leading to Diptera, the hindwing has undergone an

P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

519

extreme evolutionary modiﬁcation, forming a dwarf structure called the haltere. This modiﬁcation is orchestrated by a Hox gene, Ultrabithorax (Ubx) (Lewis, 1978; Weatherbee et al., 1998). Removing Ubx function in Drosophila results in the transformation of haltere into forewing, which represents a more ancestral morphology (Lewis, 1978). None of the Hox genes regulate forewing development, indicating that the forewing represents the Hox-free state in Drosophila (Struhl, 1982). The modiﬁcation situation in beetles is, in a way, reversed, as it is the forewing that has been highly modiﬁed (Fig. 3A, B). Surprisingly, elytra are Hox-free structures despite their divergent morphology, and Ubx cancels the modiﬁcations to maintain relatively ancestral insect wing characters in the hindwing in beetles (Tomoyasu et al., 2005). These ﬁndings indicate that the evolution of elytron has been achieved without any Hox input.
To gain more insights into the Hox-free modiﬁcation mechanism responsible for the evolution of elytra, we have performed an RNA interference (RNAi) screening based on the candidate gene approach. Over 30 genes, whose Drosophila counterparts are known to affect wing patterning (i.e. wing genes), were tested in Tribolium ((Tomoyasu et al., 2009; Tomoyasu et al., 2005) and data not shown). RNAi for most of these wing genes induced similar loss-of-function phenotypes both in elytra and hindwings, indicating that these genes are not involved in the induction of elytron-speciﬁc traits. However, RNAi for several genes caused different phenotypes between elytra and hindwings. One such gene is apterous (ap). RNAi for ap in Tribolium caused a reduction of exoskeletalization in the elytron, but also caused an ectopic induction of exoskeletalization in the hindwing (Tomoyasu et al., 2009). Thus, ap has a dual function in the formation of elytra, induction of an elytron-speciﬁc trait in elytra and repression of the same trait in hindwings (Tomoyasu et al., 2009).
Another gene that caused an interesting elytron phenotype when knocked down was abrupt (ab). ab encodes an evolutionarily conserved transcription factor that contains BTB and zinc ﬁnger domains (Hu et al., 1995). ab is a highly pleiotropic gene both in Drosophila and Tribolium, playing important roles in various tissues, including the central nervous system, legs, antennae and wings (Angelini et al., 2009; Angelini et al., 2012; Caygill and Johnston, 2008; Grieder et al., 2007; Hu et al., 1995; Jang et al., 2009). In the wing, a mutation in ab results in the loss of a particular wing vein in Drosophila (Biehs et al., 1998; Cook et al., 2004;

Hu et al., 1995) (also see Fig. 1H). We noticed that RNAi for ab in Tribolium induced a shape change phenotype in elytra. The effect appeared to be limited to elytra, as the hindwing shape remained unaffected. This result led us to speculate that ab has an important role for the induction of the unique elytron shape, which is essential for the protective function of elytra.
In this study, we performed an in depth analysis on the function of ab during dorsal appendage development in Tribolium and Drosophila to elucidate the unique contribution of ab to the evolution of elytra. Our analysis has revealed that ab has gained a novel function in determining the unique elytron shape. We also found a previously undescribed essential function of ab in the Notch signal-associated wing formation process, which appears to have been conserved between Tribolium and Drosophila. Taken together, these results suggest that ab has gained a new function during elytron evolution without compromising the conserved wing-related functions in the lineage leading toward beetles.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Beetle culture
The beetle cultures were reared on whole wheat ﬂour (þ5% yeast) at 30 °C in a temperature and humidity controlled incubator. An enhancer trap line pu11 (Lorenzen et al., 2003), which is the nub enhancer trap line (Clark-Hachtel et al., 2013), was utilized for all the RNAi experiments.
2.2. Fly strains
The ﬂy lines used in this study were maintained and crossed at either 25 °C or 18 °C on a standard Drosophila medium. The detailed genotypes of the GAL4, RNAi and overexpression lines used in this study are summarized in Table S1. GAL4, UAS-overexpression, and TRiP (Transgenic RNAi project at Harvard Medical School) lines, were obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila stock center. The VDRC and NIG RNAi lines were obtained from Vienna Drosophila research center (VDRC) and National Institute of Genetics (NIG), respectively (Dietzl et al., 2007; Umemori et al., 2009).

Fig. 1. ab RNAi wing phenotypes in Tribolium and Drosophila. (A–C) wild-type Tribolium hindwing. Boxes a (anterior region) and p (posterior region) in A correspond to B and C, respectively. (D) wild-type Drosophila wing. (E–G) ab RNAi phenotypes in the Tribolium hindwing. ab RNAi induced vein defects both in the anterior and posterior regions (arrows in F, G). (H) A typical Drosophila ab wing phenotype produced by an ab TRiP RNAi line with nub-Gal4, in which the L5 vein is disrupted (arrow in H). 4 μg/μl ab dsRNA was injected in the last larval stage in Tribolium and a hairpin-based RNAi was used in Drosophila. Scale bar indicates 500 μm (A, D, E, H) or 200 μm (B, C, F, G).

520 P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

2.3. Gene cloning
Tribolium orthologs of Drosophila ab and shape genes were identiﬁed via BLAST analysis. Tribolium pupal cDNA was used to clone the genes into PCR4-TOPO vector (PCR4-TOPO-TA cloning kit, Life technologies). The detailed primer information along with the GenBank accession numbers is summarized in Table S2.
2.4. dsRNA synthesis
dsRNA molecules for RNAi were synthesized as described before (Philip and Tomoyasu, 2011). In brief, ﬁrst, the dsRNA templates were synthesized by PCR using the TOPO_RNAi primer (for the long ab fragment and all the shape genes) or gene speciﬁc primers with the T7 polymerase promoter sequence at the 5′ end (for the two short ab fragments). dsRNAs were then synthesized
by in vitro transcription (Megascript T7, Ambion) using 1 μg of
templates. The resulting dsRNA samples were puriﬁed by MegaClear kit (Ambion). Speciﬁcity of the products was conﬁrmed via agarose gel electrophoresis. Concentration of dsRNA ranged from
4–10 μg/μl.
2.5. Tribolium injection
Injections were carried out in the last larval stage or penultimate larval stage as described before (Linz et al., 2014; Philip and Tomoyasu, 2011). Appropriate larval stages were chosen based on the EYFP expression in the developing wing and elytron discs (Clark-Hachtel et al., 2013). At least thirty larvae were utilized for
each set of injections. 1 μg/μl of dsRNA was used for all RNAi experiments, except ab RNAi at the last larval stage, for which 4 μg/ μl of dsRNA was used to achieve maximum penetrance. Approximately 0.7–0.9 μl of dsRNA solution was injected into each larva.
After injection, the larvae were kept in ﬂour at 30 °C until they became adults for phenotypic analysis.
2.6. Off-target effect assessment
In order to eliminate the possibility of off-target effect (OTE), we performed RNAi targeting two non-overlapping regions of the ab gene. The absence of OTE was conﬁrmed when RNAi for these two non-overlapping regions produced the same phenotypes, which was also the same as the phenotypes by the long fragment RNAi. The detailed primer information to obtain these non-overlapping fragments can be seen in Table S2. The corresponding locations of these fragments relative to the longer fragment both in Drosophila and Tribolium are illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1.
2.7. Tissue staining
Drosophila wing discs were ﬁxed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 25 min at room temperature. After several washes with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBT), the discs were incubated with primary antibodies diluted in PBT with 10% normal goat serum (NGS) at 4 °C overnight. After washing several times in PBT, discs were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with secondary antibodies diluted in PBT with NGS. After several washes in PBT, discs were mounted on the slide glass with ProLong mountant (Life technologies). Antibodies used in this work and their dilutions are as follows; anti-mouse Alexa 555 (1:400; Life technologies), antirabbit Alexa 488 (1:400; Life technologies), anti-goat Alexa 555 (1:500; Life technologies), Goat anti-Ser (1:2000; Santa Cruz), Rabbit anti-Ab (1:200, gift from S. Crew) (Hu et al., 1995), anti-Wg (4D4) (1:50) (Brook and Cohen, 1996), anti-En/Inv (4D9)(1:10). anti-Wg and anti-En/Inv (developed by S. Cohen and C. Goodman, respectively) were obtained from the Developmental Studies

Hybridoma Bank (DSHB) created by the NICHD and maintained at The University of Iowa. Dissection and in situ hybridization of Tribolium dorsal appendage imaginal discs were performed as previously described (Tomoyasu et al., 2009; Tomoyasu et al., 2005).
2.8. Documentation and image processing
The Tribolium and Drosophila adult tissues were ﬁxed in 95% ethanol overnight, dissected, and mounted on microscopic glass slides using Permount. The images were captured using Zeiss AxioCam MRc5 connected to the AxioPlan 2 microscope. Whole adult bodies of Tribolium and Drosophila were documented by Zeiss Discovery V12. The method for the elytron and wing measurement is described in detail in the result section (also refer to Fig. 3). Zeiss AxioVision software was used to obtain the wing measurements. Confocal ﬂuorescent images were obtained using Zeiss LSM710 microscope. Some pictures were enhanced only for brightness and contrast with Adobe Photoshop CS3 or CC 2014.
3. Results
3.1. ab has a conserved role in hindwing vein patterning in Tribolium
ab was one of the few genes identiﬁed through the initial RNAi screening that gave an intriguing elytron shape phenotype when depleted. Since the elytron is a novel trait in the beetle lineage, any functions related to the production of this unique structure likely represent evolutionary modiﬁcations that occurred in the beetle wing gene network. To elucidate how the ab elytron phenotype relates to the acquisition of a novel function, we ﬁrst questioned whether the known ab function in Drosophila is conserved in Tribolium wing development. In Drosophila, ab is crucial for the formation of a posterior wing vein (longitudinal vein 5, L5) ((Biehs et al., 1998; Bier, 2000; Blair, 2007; Cook et al., 2004; Hu et al., 1995), also see Fig. 1D, H). Since wing proliferation and patterning occur during the last larval stage in Tribolium (Clark-Hachtel et al., 2013), we performed ab RNAi at the last larval stage. The knockdown of ab during the last larval stage induced defects in wing vein patterning in Tribolium (Fig. 1). Several veins were disrupted in the posterior region (Fig. 1A, C, E, G), which appear to reﬂect the evolutionarily conserved ab function in posterior vein formation. In addition, an anterior vein was also affected (Fig. 1A, B, E, F), suggesting that the vein function of ab extends to a wider region in Tribolium than in Drosophila. None of the negative control injections (EGFP-480bp dsRNA (Miller et al., 2012), Supplementary Fig. 2) or RNAi for other wing shape genes (Fig. 4) caused any vein pattern defects, thus the defects in vein patterning observed by ab RNAi are speciﬁc to the reduction in ab function. In addition, a whole mount in situ hybridization analysis revealed that ab is expressed in the hindwing disc, in a pattern that overlaps with the anterior and posterior vein regions affected by ab RNAi (Supplementary Fig. 3). Taken together, these results indicate that the involvement of ab in vein patterning is conserved between Drosophila and Tribolium. In addition to the ab hindwing phenotypes, we also observed defects in antennae and legs that were previously reported ((Angelini et al., 2009; Angelini et al., 2012), also see Supplementary Fig. 4). These phenotypes are consistent with previously published Drosophila ab phenotypes (Hu et al., 1995), providing further evidence for the conservation of ab function between Tribolium and Drosophila.
3.2. ab has a novel role in the Tribolium elytron
ab RNAi caused several abnormalities in the elytron, including a

P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

521

Fig. 2. ab RNAi elytron phenotypes generated by last larval injection. (A–D) wild-type adult (A) and elytron (B–D). Distinct margin structures are indicated by the arrow in B (anterior cuticular patch) and arrow in D (hair-like structure at the distal tip). The unique parallel vein pattern on the dorsal surface of the elytron is also indicated (C). (E–H) ab RNAi adult (E) and elytron (F–H). ab RNAi elytron shows a distinct shape change phenotype (F). The unique parallel vein pattern is also disrupted (arrows in G). The margin markers remain intact (arrows in F and H). 4 μg/μl ab dsRNA was injected in the last larval stage in Tribolium. Scale bar indicates 500 μm (A, B, E, F) or 100 μm (C, D, G, H).

vein pattern disruption (Fig. 2C, G). It also caused a distinct gap between the pair of elytra, exposing the dorsal surface of the abdomen beneath it (Fig. 2A, E). Morphological analysis revealed that the gap was caused by a change in shape of the ab RNAi elytron (Fig. 2B, F). The shape of the ab RNAi elytron is intriguing because it no longer retains the atypical shape of the wild-type elytron, exhibiting an almost “wing-like” appearance similar to the shape of an elytron in Protocoleoptera (an extinct order related to Coleoptera that possessed primitive morphologies (Kukalova, 1969). Also see the graphical abstract) (Fig. 2F). In addition, this shape effect appears to be limited to the elytron without affecting the hindwing shape, raising the possibility that ab could be an important factor to produce the unique elytron shape.
The elytron shape could be altered by margin deletions, instead of a change in the dimensions of the elytron. To test this possibility, we examined several distinct margin structures, such as a ventral patch composed of dense hair structures at the anterior margin (Fig. 2B), a strip of less sclerotized region at the posterior margin (data not shown), and a cluster of long hair-like structures at the distal tip (Fig. 2D). Despite the shape change caused by ab RNAi, these margin structures remained intact (Fig. 2D, H. Also see arrowheads in B and F), excluding the possibility of margin deletions. Hence, ab appears to have acquired an essential role in inducing a more derived shape of elytron, which has been beneﬁcial during beetle evolution.
3.3. ab RNAi induces wing-like elytron shape without affecting the shape of the hindwing
To understand the nature of the shape change phenotype caused by ab RNAi, we have performed a morphometric analysis. In a typical insect wing, the wing width tends to gradually reduce as it progresses towards the distal end. Ancestors of beetles also appear to have had forewings (or primitive elytra) with their width gradually reduced towards the distal ends (Kukalova, 1969). The elytron of modern beetles is atypical in the sense that the reduction of width towards the distal end is not so gradual, resulting in a relatively stout shape (Fig. 3A, B). This unique elytron shape provides a tight seal between the left and right elytra.
To represent the degree of width reduction along the proximodistal axis, we have developed a Proximal-Distal (PD) index. This index is obtained by measuring the length (A) as well as the

width at two positions. The proximal width (B) is at 20% of the wing length measured from the proximal end, and the distal width (C) at 80% measured from the proximal end (Fig. 3A, B). The widths are then normalized against the length (C/A and B/A). The ratio of C/A and B/A represents the PD index. The PD index of 1.0 represents no distal width reduction (i.e. a rectangular shape, Fig. 3C), while a smaller PD index represents a more signiﬁcant distal width reduction (trapezoid or triangular shapes, Fig. 3C). The PD index of wild-type elytron is 0.88 (n ¼20), while the PD index of wild-type hindwing is 0.76 (n ¼13) (Fig. 3). The difference in the PD indices between the elytron and hindwing is statistically signiﬁcant (bracket a in Fig. 3D), indicating the applicability of this index to differentiate the elytron shape from that of hindwing. The PD index of the ab RNAi elytron (ab elytron I) is 0.75 (n¼ 26), which signiﬁcantly differs from that of the wild-type elytron (brackets b in Fig. 3D). The reduced PD index value of the ab RNAi elytron matches to that of wild-type hindwing, hence the ab RNAi elytron is in fact becoming a more wing-like shape (brackets c in Fig. 3D).
As we mentioned before, ab RNAi appears to uniquely affect the elytron shape without affecting the hindwing shape. To validate whether the hindwing shape is unaffected by ab RNAi, we sought to compare the PD indices between the ab RNAi hindwing and the wild-type hindwing. However, a failure to unfold hindwings caused by an eclosion defect in some ab RNAi beetles prevented us from measuring the hindwings from those individuals. We decided to use only the individuals that had successfully eclosed for our PD index comparison between elytra and hindwings. A caveat is that these individuals tend to show weaker abnormalities, which could fail to represent the actual severity of the hindwing shape phenotype. To have an unbiased comparison between elytra and hindwings, we reevaluated the ab RNAi elytron PD index only from the individuals that had successfully eclosed (ab elytron II in Fig. 3D). The elytron PD index from those individuals was 0.80 (n ¼19), which is still statistically different from that of the wildtype elytron (brackets b in Fig. 3D). In contrast, the PD index of the hindwing from these individuals (0.77, n ¼ 19) was not different from that of the wild-type hindwing 0.76 (n¼ 13, bracket d in Fig. 3D). Therefore, ab RNAi appears to uniquely affect the elytron shape without affecting the shape of the hindwing.
In summary, the PD index analysis revealed that the shape of the ab RNAi elytron is signiﬁcantly different from that of wild-type

522 P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

Fig. 3. Morphometric analysis of ab RNAi elytra and hindwings. (A, B) The widths and length measured for the shape analysis. (C) The formula for the PD index and an illustration showing the relationship between shapes and PD index. (D) PD index comparison between wild-type and ab RNAi dorsal appendages. Statistical analysis carried out by unpaired t-test assuming unequal variances (* ¼P o0.0001, ns¼ non-signiﬁcant). The PD index of the wild-type elytron is signiﬁcantly different from that of the hindwing (bracket a). The PD indices of ab RNAi elytra (ab RNAi elytron I and II) are signiﬁcantly reduced when compared to that of the wild-type elytron (brackets b). The PD index of ab RNAi elytron is similar to that of wild-type hindwing (brackets c), validating the wing-like shape of elytron induced by ab RNAi. In contrast, no difference is observed between the wild-type and ab RNAi hindwings (bracket d), indicating that ab RNAi does not affect the hindwing shape and size.

elytron, and it is in fact more similar to the shape of wild-type hindwing. The shape of the ab RNAi hindwing remains unaffected, emphasizing that the shape change phenotype caused by ab RNAi is unique to the elytron. These results suggest that ab has gained an important function during beetle evolution to produce the novel elytron shape.
3.4. RNAi for shape genes affects both the elytron and hindwing shapes
The idea that ab acts as an elytron-speciﬁc shape determinant is based on the fact that ab RNAi affects the elytron shape without affecting the hindwing shape. A caveat of this interpretation is that

hindwing may be less sensitive to RNAi or disruption of gene function to produce shape changes, resulting in a superﬁcial elytron-speciﬁc phenotype. If this is the case, we should see a similar bias in the phenotypes induced by RNAi for other known shape genes. To address this possibility, we performed RNAi for the Tribolium orthologs of the genes known to affect tissue size and shape in Drosophila.
Three main pathways inﬂuencing tissue size and shape in Drosophila are (i) Insulin pathway (ii) Hippo pathway, and (iii) cell cycle regulators (reviewed in (Johnston and Gallant, 2002; NetoSilva et al., 2009; Pan, 2010)). From each pathway, we chose genes that are known to affect the wing size and shape when mutated. dachs (Mao et al., 2006) and yorkie (yki) (Huang et al., 2005) from

P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

523

Fig. 4. Shape gene RNAi phenotypes produced by last larval injection. Elytron (left column) and hindwing (right column) of wild-type (A, B) and shape gene RNAi (C–J). (C, D) chico RNAi, (E, F) dachs RNAi, (G, H) dMyc RNAi, and (I, J) Pten RNAi. (K, L) ab RNAi shown as a comparison. The vein defect in the ab RNAi hindwing is indicated by an arrow (L). Note that, unlike shape gene RNAi, ab RNAi affects the elytron shape without affecting the shape of the hindwing. Scale bar indicates 500 μm. The scale bars in A and B apply to all images of each respective dorsal appendage.

the Hippo pathway, Pten (Goberdhan et al., 1999) and chico (Böhni et al., 1999) from the insulin pathway, and dMyc (Wu and Johnston, 2010) from the cell cycle pathway were chosen (see Table S3 for a summary of these genes and their mutant phenotypes in Drosophila).
Among the genes tested, RNAi for chico and dachs signiﬁcantly affected the elytron shape (Fig. 4A, C, E). However, unlike ab RNAi, both chico and dachs RNAi also produced size/shape phenotypes in the hindwing (Fig. 4B, D, F). chico RNAi affected the length, while dachs RNAi affected both the length and PD index of the hindwing (Fig. 5). These results are distinct from the ab phenotype, as ab RNAi affects only the elytron shape and size without affecting the shape and size of hindwing (Fig. 3, Fig. 4K, L), further supporting the idea that ab is an elytron-speciﬁc shape determinant.
Both the PD index and length of chico RNAi elytron resemble

those of ab RNAi (Fig. 5A, B), which may suggest a connection between ab and Insulin pathway in the regulation of the elytron shape. In contrast, dachs RNAi affected the shape very differently compared to ab RNAi. dachs RNAi induced a signiﬁcant contraction of the middle part of the elytron without affecting its width (Fig. 4E and Fig. 5B, D). Interestingly, this shape change also causes PD index reduction, making the PD value similar to those of ab and chico RNAi elytra (Fig. 5A). However, the difference in the modes of shape change between ab and dachs RNAi implies that Hippo pathway operates independently from ab to determine the dorsal appendage shape and size.
RNAi for Pten did not produce any noticeable phenotypes (Figs. 4I, J and 5A, D), whereas dMyc RNAi weakly affected the elytron length without affecting PD index (Figs. 4G, H and 5 A, B). yki RNAi resulted in larval lethality, preventing us from evaluating

524 P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

Fig. 5. Statistical analysis for shape gene RNAi elytra and hindwings. (A) The PD index of the shape gene RNAi elytra. RNAi for ab, chico and dachs show statistically signiﬁcant reduction in PD index compared to wild-type (indicated by *, Po 0.001, t test). (B) The length of the shape gene RNAi elytra. RNAi for ab, chico, dachs, and dMyc show statistically signiﬁcant reduction in length compared to wild-type (*, P o 0.001, t test). (C) The PD index of the shape gene RNAi hindwings. RNAi for dachs shows a slight increase in PD index compared to wild-type (* Po 0.001, t test). (D) The length of the shape gene RNAi for hindwing. RNAi for chico, and dachs show statistically signiﬁcant reduction in length compared to wild-type (* P o0.001, t test). Statistical analysis was carried out by unpaired t-test assuming unequal variances.

the adult phenotype. Further analysis is required to evaluate the contribution of these factors to the regulation of the elytron shape and size.
Taken together, these results indicate that the hindwing shape and size can be altered by RNAi in Tribolium, which excludes the possibility that the elytron-speciﬁc ab shape phenotype is superﬁcially created by a difference in RNAi sensitivity between elytra and hindwings. The similar effects of chico and ab RNAi on elytron shape suggests a potential interaction of ab with the Insulin pathway in the regulation of elytron shape.
3.5. ab has an additional role in the early dorsal appendages development in Tribolium
In addition to the distinct ab expression pattern in the mature hindwing disc, in situ hybridization analysis also revealed a strong and ubiquitous expression of ab in the early stage elytron and hindwing discs (Supplementary Fig. 3). This raised the possibility that ab has an additional earlier function in dorsal appendage development in Tribolium. To test this hypothesis, we performed ab RNAi at the penultimate larval stage (one stage before the last larval stage). Penultimate ab RNAi caused severe lethality (88%, n ¼44). The individuals that survived to adulthood exhibited some of the phenotypes observed by last larval ab RNAi, which include the defect in the parallel vein patterning in elytra (Fig. 6C compare to Fig. 2C), and antennae/leg defects (data not shown). Surprisingly, these escapers also showed drastic developmental defects in

the dorsal appendages (Fig. 6A, compare to Fig. 2A). Both the elytron and hindwing formation was signiﬁcantly disrupted in penultimate ab RNAi (Fig. 6B, E, F, compare to Fig. 2B, E), possibly due to a severe proliferation defect and/or excess cell death. We also observed some margin deletions in the penultimate ab RNAi elytron. Although the distinct hair-like structures at the distal tip remain intact, the ventral patch at the anterior margin (Fig. 2B arrowhead) was missing, indicating a severe margin deletion (Fig. 6B, D). The penultimate ab RNAi hindwing had an even more severe phenotype (the hindwings were barely visible. Fig. 6E, F), possibly due to the combination of proliferation defects and margin truncations. In conclusion, the penultimate ab RNAi revealed that ab has an additional role in the early dorsal appendages development, which is critical for the formation of both elytra and hindwings in Tribolium. We also noticed a potential transformation of the ventral surface of elytron to hindwing identity by penultimate ab RNAi (Supplementary Fig. 5). Further analyses will be required to understand the nature of this intriguing transformation.
3.6. ab is also essential for wing development in Drosophila
The most severe ab wing phenotype described in Drosophila is the L5 wing vein defect (Hu et al., 1995); see also Fig. 1H). This phenotype is consistent with the ab expression pattern in the Drosophila wing disc, in which the strong ab expression corresponds to the future L5 vein region (Cook et al., 2004) (also see

P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

525

Fig. 6. ab RNAi elytron phenotypes generated by penultimate larval injection. (A) ab RNAi adult, (B–D) elytron, and (E, F) hindwing. ab RNAi elytron shows drastic proliferation defect (B). The unique parallel vein pattern is also disrupted (C). The anterior patch is missing (B), while the distal tip hair structure is unaffected (arrow in I). ab RNAi hindwing shows a drastic proliferation defect and is badly crumpled due to severe eclosion defects (E, F). 1 μg/μl ab dsRNA was injected in the penultimate larval stage in Tribolium. Scale bar indicates 500 μm (A, B, F) or 100 μm (C, D).

Fig. 7A). However, the drastic dorsal appendages defect induced by penultimate ab RNAi in Tribolium made us wonder whether this important function of ab has been overlooked in Drosophila. To test this possibility, we utilized an ab RNAi line obtained from VDRC (v104582) (Dietzl et al., 2007) to knock down ab in the Drosophila wing. Interestingly, ab RNAi induced by nub-Gal4 line that expresses Gal4 in the wing (Calleja et al., 1996) caused drastic reduction of the wing (Fig. 7B–D). A caveat of this phenotype is an off-target effect (OTE) caused by the v104582 ab RNAi hairpin construct. To eliminate this possibility, we utilized several additional ab RNAi lines available from public stock centers. These lines target regions of the ab genes that do not overlap with the VDRC v104582 (Supplementary Fig. 1). We can exclude the possibility of OTE if we observe the same phenotype by these non-overlapping RNAi lines. The NIG ab RNAi lines (Umemori et al., 2009) induced a similar wing reduction phenotype when expressed by nub-Gal4. The other VDRC ab RNAi line (v41005), which targets an almost identical region as the NIG ab RNAi lines, also induced a severe wing defect that resembles the phenotype induced by VDRC v104582 (data not shown). These results clearly exclude the possibility that the severe wing defect observed by ab RNAi in Drosophila is due to OTE. In contrast, the two TRiP lines (Ni et al., 2011; Perrimon et al., 2010) we have tested produced only the L5 wing vein defects (data not shown). The reason behind the difference in the phenotypes between the TRiP and other RNAi lines is yet to be

determined. Both TRiP lines target the 3’UTR region of the ab gene (Supplementary Fig. 1), which may inﬂuence the efﬁciency of the RNAi knock down. The differences in the hairpin constructs, such as the linker sequences and the polyA signals, could also inﬂuence the expression levels of these RNAi constructs. In summary, our RNAi analysis in Drosophila provides evidence that the early function of ab during wing formation is in fact conserved between Drosophila and Tribolium.
3.7. ab functions in part by modulating Notch activity
To investigate the molecular mechanism of how ab inﬂuences early wing development, we further analyzed the phenotypes caused by ab knock-down as well as ab misexpression in Drosophila. Knocking down ab speciﬁcally in the posterior compartment by en-Gal4 induced a reduction of the posterior wing (Fig. 7E), further supporting the essential function of ab during wing development. ab RNAi induced by MS1096 Gal4 (another wing Gal4 driver (Capdevila and Guerrero, 1994)) also caused a severe reduction of the wing tissues (Fig. 7F). Interestingly, in addition to the wing tissue reduction, we also noticed that the wing margin structure is malformed (exhibiting both truncation and duplication) in the MS1096 Gal4/ab RNAi wing (arrow and arrowhead in Fig. 7F). The margin of the Drosophila wing is formed from the dorsal-ventral (DV) compartmental boundary of the wing disc,

526 P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

Fig. 7. Functional characterization of ab in the Drosophila wing. (A) Ab expression pattern in the wing disc, showing overall expression in the disc with a strong accumulation of Ab near the future L5 vein (arrow). (B) wild-type Drosophila wing. (C–D) Wing (C) and the adult ﬂy (D) overexpressing ab RNAi under nub-Gal4. Severe wing proliferation defect is indicated by arrow in D. (E) ab-RNAi/en-Gal4. The posterior portion of the wing is severely reduced. (F) ab-RNAi/MS1096-Gal4. Both deletion (arrow) and duplication (arrowhead) of the margin are observed. (G) ab-RNAi/c96-Gal4. (H) UAS-ab/c96-Gal4. Both RNAi and overexpression of ab via the c96-Gal4 driver resulted in margin deletion (G, H). (I) wild-type Wg expression. (J, K) Wg expression in the wing disc with ab overexpression mosaics (i: merge and ii: Wg). Wg is repressed by the overexpression of ab in the endogenous Wg expression domain (arrow), but also ectopically induced in the ventral compartment outside the endogenous Wg expression domain (arrowhead). Scale bar indicates 100 μm (A) 500 μm (B–H), or 50 μm (I–K).

which acts as an organizer to coordinate wing disc development (Brook et al., 1996). The malformation of the wing margin structures in the ab RNAi wing hints the possibility that ab is involved in the D/V patterning. In line with this idea, ab RNAi induced by c96 Gal4, which expresses Gal4 speciﬁcally in the DV boundary (Gustafson and Boulianne, 1996), resulted in extensive margin deletions (Fig. 7G). These results indicate that ab is involved in DV patterning in the Drosophila wing development. However, ab might not be simply acting as a positive margin inducer, as misexpression of ab by c96 Gal4 also induced severe margin deletions (Fig. 7H). This type of complex interaction is often observed when Notch signal is disrupted (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 1995), making us speculate that ab is a modulator of Notch signaling. A previous genome-wide misexpression screening also identiﬁed ab as a potential Notch signal attenuator (Grieder et al., 2007).
To elucidate the interaction between ab and Notch signal, we have analyzed the inﬂuence of ab overexpression on Notch signal activity. The mosaic overexpression of ab signiﬁcantly affected the expression of Wingless (Wg), a target of Notch signaling in the wing (Fig. 7I–K). In the endogenous Wg expression domain, ab overexpression repressed the Wg expression cell autonomously (arrows in Fig. 7J, K), suggesting that ab is a Notch signal inhibitor. However, we also noticed that ab overexpression mosaics also ectopically induced Wg cell non-autonomously (arrowheads in Fig. 7J, K), indicating that Notch signal is ectopically activated in the surrounding cells. A similar interaction has been observed when the activity of Notch ligands are modiﬁed in a mosaic manner (for example, see (Kim et al., 1995)). To further evaluate the involvement of ab in the Notch pathway, we overexpressed ab along the anterior-posterior (AP) boundary of the wing imaginal disc by dpp Gal4 (Morimura et al., 1996) (Supplementary Fig. 6). It

has been shown that ectopic activation of Notch signal along the AP boundary induces the two Notch ligands, Serrate (Ser) and Delta (Dl), leading to ectopic activation of Notch signal both in the dorsal and ventral compartments (Panin et al., 1997). In contrast, overexpression of each ligand along the AP boundary leads to the activation of Notch signal in a dorsoventrally restricted manner (ventral speciﬁc Notch signal activation by Ser overexpression and dorsal speciﬁc activation by Dl overexpression) (Panin et al., 1997). Overexpression of ab along the AP boundary resulted in ectopic Notch activation (monitored by Wg expression) only in the ventral compartment (Supplementary Fig. 6A, B). In addition, immunostaninig against Ser protein revealed that Ser is induced along the AP boundary by ab overexpression (Supplementary Fig. 6C–H). These data suggest that ab acts upstream of Notch signal, in part through regulating Ser expression. We also noticed that the involvement of ab in Notch regulation might not be limited to the wing, as we observed that ab RNAi and overexpression caused Notch-related phenotypes in other tissues, such as the notum, leg, and eye (Supplementary document. 1). Taken together, these results demonstrate that the evolutionarily conserved ab functions during wing formation are in part achieved by modulating Notch signaling.
4. Discussion
In this study, we have investigated the function of ab during dorsal appendage development in Tribolium and Drosophila. Our analysis has revealed that ab has gained a novel function in the regulation of elytron shape. In addition, we also found that ab has a previously undescribed critical function in early wing

P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

527

development, which has been conserved between Tribolium and Drosophila.
4.1. Evolution of elytra and a novel function of ab
Protocoleoptera is an extinct order, which is thought to represent an ancestral state of modern beetles (Grimaldi and Engel, 2005). Fossil evidence indicates that, unlike modern beetle elytra, protocoleopteran elytra had a relatively typical insect wing shape and vein pattern (Kukalova, 1969). In the lineage leading to Coleoptera, the elytron has gained a unique shape enabling them to secure the tight sealing at the dorsal midline of the beetle. The innovation of the unique elytron shape was crucial for the evolutionary success of the beetle lineage (Crowson, 1981; Grimaldi and Engel, 2005). The molecular basis of elytron evolution is just beginning to be unraveled.
Since the beetle hindwing maintains a relatively typical insect wing shape, changes in genetic pathways responsible for the elytron shape must be speciﬁc to the elytron. RNAi for most of the genes in the conserved wing gene network caused similar abnormalities in both elytra and hindwings, therefore these genes are unlikely to be responsible for the evolution of elytra per se. Although ab RNAi at the last larval stage caused abnormalities in both elytra and hindwings, the shape phenotype is observed only in elytra, suggesting that ab is a part of the changes responsible for the evolution of the unique elytron shape.
Our RNAi analysis at various time points has revealed detailed involvement of ab during the development of beetle elytra. ab RNAi at the penultimate stage caused severe developmental defects both in elytra and hindwings. In contrast, ab RNAi at the last larval stage induced a shape change phenotype only in the elytron. In the hindwing, the last larval ab RNAi caused vein patterning defects, but did not affect the shape. We have also performed ab RNAi later in the last larval stage (but before the prepupal stage). Although this late ab RNAi caused a defect in the parallel vein patterning in elytra, it did not affect the elytron shape (data not shown). Therefore, the mid last larval stage before pupation appears to be the critical period for the novel function of ab in the elytron shape regulation.
It is currently unknown how ab elicits this elytron speciﬁc shape function. ab may locally induce cell death or suppress cell proliferation. It is also possible that ab regulates the overall elytron shape via cell non-autonomous factors such as growth signals. The similarity between ab and chico RNAi phenotypes in the elytron suggests that ab and Insulin pathway may cooperatively regulate the elytron shape. In contrast, dachs RNAi caused a distinct shape phenotype, in which the middle portion of elytron is predominantly reduced. Thus, Hippo pathway, a well-known tissue size and shape regulator, might be independent of the ab elytron shape regulation.
Our analysis in Drosophila has revealed a connection between ab and Notch signal during dorsal appendage development. Unfortunately, RNAi for Notch or genes that code for Notch ligands (Dl and Ser) at the last larval stage in Tribolium caused severe lethality, which prevented us from assessing the involvement of Notch signal in elytron shape regulation in Tribolium. We have also performed RNAi in Tribolium for nubbin (nub), which is known to modulate Notch signal during wing development in Drosophila (Neumann and Cohen, 1998). Although nub RNAi caused a shape change phenotype in the dorsal appendages, the resulting shape of the elytron was very different from that of the ab RNAi elytron ((Tomoyasu et al., 2009) and Tomoyasu, unpublished data). Therefore, the novel function of ab in elytron shape regulation may be independent of Notch. Further investigation will be required to elucidate the developmental and mechanistic basis of the elytron shape determination regulated by ab, and the possible

involvement of Notch signal in this process.
4.2. Evolutionarily conserved functions of ab and Notch signal
In addition to the elytron shape determination function, we found that ab is also important for the wing vein patterning in Tribolium. This vein patterning function of ab appears to be conserved during the evolution of insects. In Drosophila, ab is required speciﬁcally for the formation of L5 vein ((Hu et al., 1995), see also Fig. 1D, H). On the other hand, in Tribolium, ab appears to have an extended functional domain, as we saw that ab RNAi affected multiple veins both in anterior and posterior regions of the hindwing (Fig. 1). Nevertheless, the involvement of ab in wing vein patterning is conserved between Tribolium and Drosophila.
Depleting ab in an earlier last larval stage in Tribolium (via penultimate ab RNAi) resulted in a drastic developmental defect both in elytra and hindwings (Fig. 6), revealing yet another critical function of ab during the Tribolium dorsal appendage development. Surprisingly, although previously undescribed, this critical function of ab in dorsal appendage formation appears to be conserved even in Drosophila, as our RNAi analysis in Drosophila caused a similar defect in the wing (Fig. 7). A genetic analysis using RNAi and misexpression approaches in Drosophila has provided us with evidence that ab modulates Notch signaling activity during Drosophila wing development, implying that the evolutionarily conserved function of ab in dorsal appendage formation is mediated through the modulation of Notch signal.
The relationship between Notch and ab is rather puzzling, as the mosaic overexpression of ab showed both negative and positive interactions between Notch and ab; preventing Notch signal in the endogenous Notch active domain, but also ectopically activating Notch signal in the cells adjacent to the ab overexpressing cells in the ventral compartment of the wing disc (Fig. 7J, K). This phenotype resembles the overexpression of one of the Notch ligands (Ser) or a Notch ligand modiﬁer (Fringe, Fng) (Kim et al., 1995; Panin et al., 1997), suggesting that ab acts upstream of Notch, possibly regulating Notch ligand activity or expression. Overexpression of ab by dpp-Gal4 also supports this idea (Supplementary Fig. 6). However, unlike Ser overexpression, ab overexpression induced Wg expression only non cell-autonomously (cf. Ser overexpression activates Notch signal both cell-autonomously and non-autonomously (Panin et al., 1997)). This suggests that ab may also regulate other Notch signal components, such as Fng, in a cell-autonomous manner. Further analysis will be required to determine the precise involvement of ab in Notch regulation. It is worth mentioning that the function of ab in modulating Notch signal is not restricted to wings (Supplementary document. 1). This raises the possibility that ab is not just a wing speciﬁc Notch modiﬁer, but rather one of the pan-Notch signal regulators that are widely used in various tissues.
4.3. ab may also be involved in the determination of elytron identity
Not only did penultimate ab RNAi result in proliferation defects of elytra and hindwings, but it also produced an interesting transformation phenotype (Supplementary Fig. 5). In the wildtype elytron, the ventral surface is not highly sclerotized, with a majority of the ventral cells lacking any noticeable cellular structures (data not shown). However, in the ab RNAi elytron, cells in the ventral surface gained a distinct hair-like structure (Supplementary Fig. 5E, F). This ectopic hair-like structure resembles the hairs that are typically seen in the wild-type hindwing cells, leading us to speculate that the ventral elytron cells gained the hindwing identity in ab RNAi beetles. Hence, ab could be important for the ventral elytron identity, which may represent yet another critical function of ab in the evolution of elytra.

528 P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

ab RNAi also disrupted the parallel vein pattern unique to elytra. We have recently found that this unique parallel vein pattern has evolved through the acquisition of a novel Notch signalbased vein formation mechanism (manuscript in preparation). The RNAi phenotype suggests that ab might also play an essential role in this elytron-speciﬁc vein patterning. It will be insightful to further investigate how ab has come to be one of the key players in the elytron development, controlling multiple elytron-speciﬁc traits (such as shape, vein pattern, and ventral identity), during the evolution of beetles.
4.4. ab in forewing /hindwing differentiation
Although ab is essential both for elytron and hindwing development, the shape function of ab is restricted to elytra. The molecular mechanism responsible for the elytron speciﬁc function of ab is yet to be examined. A simple explanation is that Ubx, the hindwing selector gene, speciﬁcally represses the shape function of ab without compromising other ab functions in hindwings. This repression could be due to a direct binding of Ubx protein to Ab, inhibiting the ab shape function selectively. Alternatively, Ubx could repress the expression of ab, but in a spatially and temporally restricted manner that would prevent a complete repression of ab in hindwings.
In Drosophila, Ubx appears to induce ab expression in the haltere (homologous to hindwings in beetles) instead of repressing it (Pavlopoulos and Akam, 2011). This reversed relationship between Ubx and ab may reﬂect different modes of Ubx action in Drosophila and Tribolium. In Drosophila, Ubx regulates many “wing genes” to modify hindwings into halteres. In contrast, the role of Ubx in beetles is to repress modiﬁcation to maintain relatively ancestral wing morphology in hindwings (Tomoyasu et al., 2005). It would be interesting to elucidate how the changes in the Ubx/ab interaction (both at the genetic and molecular levels) have affected the morphological diversity of insect wings.
5. Conclusions
Our analysis has revealed a novel function of ab in determining the unique elytron shape in Tribolium. This function appears to have been gained in the beetle lineage without compromising the evolutionarily conserved functions of ab during the dorsal appendage development. Furthermore, we found that ab has a previously undescribed critical function in the formation of dorsal appendages, which in part is mediated through modulation of Notch signal. Gaining a new function without losing conserved functions appears to be a key theme in the evolution of morphologically novel structures.
Elytra in beetles display an impressive array of diversity. Beautifully colored patterns in jewel beetles Buprestidae, peculiar shapes in the violin beetle Lebiinae, or extensive miniaturization in rove beetles Staphylinidae, are some fascinating examples to name a few. The contribution of ab to the evolution of elytra described in this study is signiﬁcant, but apparently is just a small portion of the many, yet to be identiﬁed, changes that have promoted elytron evolution. A combination of taxonomical, developmental, and genomics approaches will provide us with a more comprehensive view of elytron evolution, which will shed light on the molecular basis of morphological innovation.
Acknowledgments
We thank Bloomington Stock Center, NIG, and VDRC for ﬂy stocks, Dr. Stephen Crews for Ab antibody, and The Developmental

Studies Hybridoma Bank (DSHB) for Wg and En antibody. We also thank the Center for Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics (CBFG) and Center for Advanced Microscopy and Imaging (CAMI) at Miami University for technical support, Jordan Thompson for technical assistance, and members of Tomoyasu lab for discussion. This work was supported by Miami University start-up grant (YT), and National Science Foundation (YT: IOS 0950964).
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.12.006.
References
Angelini, D.R., Kikuchi, M., Jockusch, E.L., 2009. Genetic patterning in the adult capitate antenna of the beetle Tribolium castaneum. Dev. Biol. 327, 240–251.
Angelini, D.R., Smith, F.W., Jockusch, E.L., 2012. Extent With Modiﬁcation: Leg Patterning in the Beetle Tribolium castaneum and the Evolution of Serial Homologs. G3 (Bethesda) 2, 235–248.
Artavanis-Tsakonas, S., Matsuno, K., Fortini, M.E., 1995. Notch signaling. Science 268, 225–232.
Biehs, B., Sturtevant, M.A., Bier, E., 1998. Boundaries in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc organize vein-speciﬁc genetic programs. Dev. (Camb. Engl.) 125, 4245–4257.
Bier, E., 2000. Drawing lines in the Drosophila wing: initiation of wing vein development. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 10, 393–398.
Blair, S.S., 2007. Wing vein patterning in Drosophila and the analysis of intercellular signaling. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 23, 293–319.
Böhni, R., Riesgo-Escovar, J., Oldham, S., Brogiolo, W., Stocker, H., Andruss, B.F., Beckingham, K., Hafen, E., 1999. Autonomous control of cell and organ size by CHICO, a Drosophila homolog of vertebrate IRS1-4. Cell 97, 865–875.
Brook, W.J., Cohen, S.M., 1996. Antagonistic interactions between wingless and decapentaplegic responsible for dorsal-ventral pattern in the Drosophila Leg. Science 273, 1373–1377.
Brook, W.J., Diaz-Benjumea, F.J., Cohen, S.M., 1996. Organizing spatial pattern in limb development. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 12, 161–180.
Calleja, M., Moreno, E., Pelaz, S., Morata, G., 1996. Visualization of gene expression in living adult Drosophila. Science 274, 252–255.
Capdevila, J., Guerrero, I., 1994. Targeted expression of the signaling molecule decapentaplegic induces pattern duplications and growth alterations in Drosophila wings. EMBO J. 13, 4459–4468.
Caygill, E.E., Johnston, L.A., 2008. Temporal regulation of metamorphic processes in Drosophila by the let-7 and miR-125 heterochronic microRNAs. Curr. Biol. 18, 943–950.
Clark-Hachtel, C.M., Linz, D.M., Tomoyasu, Y., 2013. Insights into insect wing origin provided by functional analysis of vestigial in the red ﬂour beetle, Tribolium castaneum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110 (42), 16951–16956.
Cook, O., Biehs, B., Bier, E., 2004. brinker and optomotor-blind act coordinately to initiate development of the L5 wing vein primordium in Drosophila. Development 131, 2113–2124.
Crowson, R.A., 1981. The Biology of the Coleoptera. Academic Press, United States of America.
Dietzl, G., Chen, D., Schnorrer, F., Su, K.C., Barinova, Y., Fellner, M., Gasser, B., Kinsey, K., Oppel, S., Scheiblauer, S., Couto, A., Marra, V., Keleman, K., Dickson, B.J., 2007. A genome-wide transgenic RNAi library for conditional gene inactivation in Drosophila. Nature 448, 151–156.
Goberdhan, D.C., Paricio, N., Goodman, E.C., Mlodzik, M., Wilson, C., 1999. Drosophila tumor suppressor PTEN controls cell size and number by antagonizing the Chico/PI3-kinase signaling pathway. Genes. Dev. 13, 3244–3258.
Grieder, N.C., Charlafti, I., Kloter, U., Jäckle, H., Schäfer, U., Gehring, W.J., 2007. Misexpression screen in Drosophila melanogaster aiming to reveal novel factors involved in formation of body parts. Genetics 175, 1707–1718.
Grimaldi, D., Engel, M.S., 2005. Evolution of the Insects. Cambridge University Press, United States of America.
Gustafson, K., Boulianne, G.L., 1996. Distinct expression patterns detected within individual tissues by the GAL4 enhancer trap technique. Genome 39, 174–182.
Hu, S., Fambrough, D., Atashi, J.R., Goodman, C.S., Crews, S.T., 1995. The Drosophila abrupt gene encodes a BTB-zinc ﬁnger regulatory protein that controls the speciﬁcity of neuromuscular connections. Genes. Dev. 9, 2936–2948.
Huang, J., Wu, S., Barrera, J., Matthews, K., Pan, D., 2005. The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the Drosophila Homolog of YAP. Cell 122, 421–434.
Hunt, T., Bergsten, J., Levkanicova, Z., Papadopoulou, A., John, O.S., Wild, R., Hammond, P.M., Ahrens, D., Balke, M., Caterino, M.S., Gomez-Zurita, J., Ribera, I., Barraclough, T.G., Bocakova, M., Bocak, L., Vogler, A.P., 2007. A comprehensive phylogeny of beetles reveals the evolutionary origins of a superradiation. Science 318, 1913–1916.

P. Ravisankar et al. / Developmental Biology 409 (2016) 518–529

529

Jang, A.C., Chang, Y.C., Bai, J., Montell, D., 2009. Border-cell migration requires integration of spatial and temporal signals by the BTB protein Abrupt. Nat. Cell. Biol. 11, 569–579.
Johnston, L.A., Gallant, P., 2002. Control of growth and organ size in Drosophila. Bioessays 24, 54–64.
Kim, J., Irvine, K.D., Carroll, S.B., 1995. Cell recognition, signal induction, and symmetrical gene activation at the dorsal-ventral boundary of the developing Drosophila wing. Cell 82, 795–802.
Kukalova, J., 1969. On the systematic position of the supposed Permian beetles, Tshecardocoleidae [sic], with a description of a new collection from Moravia. Sb. Geol. Ved.: Paleontol. 11, 139–162.
Lewis, E.B., 1978. A gene complex controlling segmentation in Drosophila. Nature 276, 565–570.
Linz, D.M., Clark-Hachtel, C.M., Borras-Castells, F., Tomoyasu, Y., 2014. Larval RNA interference in the red ﬂour beetle Tribolium castaneum. J. Vis. Exp., e52059.
Lorenzen, M.D., Berghammer, A.J., Brown, S.J., Denell, R.E., Klingler, M., Beeman, R. W., 2003. piggyBac-mediated germline transformation in the beetle Tribolium castaneum. Insect Mol. Biol. 12, 433–440.
Mao, Y., Rauskolb, C., Cho, E., Hu, W.L., Hayter, H., Minihan, G., Katz, F.N., Irvine, K.D., 2006. Dachs: an unconventional myosin that functions downstream of Fat to regulate growth, afﬁnity and gene expression in Drosophila. Development 133, 2539–2551.
Miller, S.C., Miyata, K., Brown, S.J., Tomoyasu, Y., 2012. Dissecting systemic RNA interference in the red ﬂour beetle Tribolium castaneum: parameters affecting the efﬁciency of RNAi. PLOS One 7, e47431.
Morimura, S., Maves, L., Chen, Y., Hoffmann, F.M., 1996. decapentaplegic overexpression affects Drosophila wing and leg imaginal disc development and wingless expression. Dev. Biol. 177, 136–151.
Neto-Silva, R.M., Wells, B.S., Johnston, L.A., 2009. Mechanisms of growth and homeostasis in the Drosophila wing. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 25, 197–220.
Neumann, C.J., Cohen, S.M., 1998. Boundary formation in Drosophila wing: Notch activity attenuated by the POU protein Nubbin. Science 281, 409–413.

Ni, J.Q., Zhou, R., Czech, B., Liu, L.P., Holderbaum, L., Yang-Zhou, D., Shim, H.S., Tao, R., Handler, D., Karpowicz, P., Binari, R., Booker, M., Brennecke, J., Perkins, L.A., Hannon, G.J., Perrimon, N., 2011. A genome-scale shRNA resource for transgenic RNAi in Drosophila. Nat. Methods 8, 405–407.
Pan, D., 2010. The hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer. Dev. Cell. 19, 491–505.
Panin, V.M., Papayannopoulos, V., Wilson, R., Irvine, K.D., 1997. Fringe modulates Notch-ligand interactions. Nature 387, 908–912.
Pavlopoulos, A., Akam, M., 2011. Hox gene Ultrabithorax regulates distinct sets of target genes at successive stages of Drosophila haltere morphogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 2855–2860.
Perrimon, N., Ni, J.Q., Perkins, L., 2010. In vivo RNAi: today tomorrow. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2, a003640.
Philip, B.N., Tomoyasu, Y., 2011. Gene knockdown analysis by double-stranded RNA injection. Methods Mol. Biol. 772, 471–497.
Struhl, G., 1982. Genes controlling segmental speciﬁcation in the Drosophila thorax. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79, 7380–7384.
Tomoyasu, Y., Arakane, Y., Kramer, K.J., Denell, R.E., 2009. Repeated co-options of exoskeleton formation during wing-to-elytron evolution in beetles. Curr. Biol. 19, 2057–2065.
Tomoyasu, Y., Wheeler, S.R., Denell, R.E., 2005. Ultrabithorax is required for membranous wing identity in the beetle Tribolium castaneum. Nature 433, 643–647.
Umemori, M., Habara, O., Iwata, T., Maeda, K., Nishinoue, K., Okabe, A., Takemura, M., Takahashi, K., Saigo, K., Ueda, R., Adachi-Yamada, T., 2009. RNAi-mediated knockdown showing impaired cell survival in Drosophila wing imaginal disc. Gene Regul. Syst. Biol. 3, 11–20.
Weatherbee, S.D., Halder, G., Kim, J., Hudson, A., Carroll, S., 1998. Ultrabithorax regulates genes at several levels of the wing-patterning hierarchy to shape the development of the Drosophila haltere. Genes Dev. 12, 1474–1482.
Wu, D.C., Johnston, L.A., 2010. Control of wing size and proportions by Drosophila myc. Genetics 184, 199–211.

