Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Global Ecology and Conservation
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/gecco
Original research article
A profile of corporate social responsibility for mining companies present in the Santurban Moorland, Santander, Colombia
Jonathan David Morales Méndez a,∗, Ramón Silva Rodríguez b,1
a Universidad Manuela Beltrán, Colombia b Universidad de Santander – UDES, Colombia

article info
Article history: Received 19 October 2015 Received in revised form 28 December 2015 Accepted 29 December 2015 Available online 13 February 2016
Keywords: Corporate social responsibility Stakeholders Mining

abstract
This work is an attempt to develop a corporate social responsibility (CSR) profile based on the practices and processes used by the mining companies present in the Santurban moorland, in the department of Santander. To achieve this, a census was applied based on 82 variables in 6 planes related to corporate social responsibility and the stakeholders. Information was collected between June of 2013 and May of 2014 using a census that was applied only to those mining companies with current registrations in the Bucaramanga Chamber of Commerce and with more than 10 employees each. The results enabled the evaluation of sectorial strengths as well as those elements that need to be improved in order to achieve an optimal level of CSR. The weaknesses found in the gold companies include: lack of clear and transparent hiring practices; lack of programs for employees who are mothers with small children; and lack of sufficient tools for identifying the needs of the closest community to the sites. They do practice diverse social investment strategies but do not track the impact of applying these in the region. It was also found that they have no clear processes for identifying, selecting, contracting and evaluating their suppliers. The greatest weakness found was with respect to the Client given that they have no client service department.
The strengths found amongst the Mining Companies in the Santurban Moorland include that most of them do have a CSR policy or strategy and demonstrate a positive attitude towards implementing this kind of program. In addition, they have gender equity and antidiscrimination policies and agreements that go beyond they law. © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction
There is no doubt about the importance of the mining and energy sector for Colombia. In 2011 this sector contributed 2.3% to GDP, showing a considerable increase from 1.8% in 2000. We find that coal contributes 68%, metals 18% and other minerals 13% to this sector of the economy (Martinez Ortiz and Aguilar, 2012).
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +57 6525202x7307, +57 3184689326 (Mob.).
E-mail addresses: Jonathan.morales@docentes.umb.edu.co (J.D. Morales Méndez), ramonsilvarodriguez@yahoo.com (R.S. Rodríguez). 1 Tel.: +57 3158388133 (Mob.). http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2015.12.005 2351-9894/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by- nc- nd/4.0/).

26 J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35
At present, mining in Colombia is divided into 33 districts located in the Andes, the Caribbean and the Pacific. Diverse minerals such as coal, gold, nickel, emeralds and others minerals are exploited in these regions (MinIsterio de Minas y Energía, 2015). With respect to gold, the focus of this article, it was equivalent to 2.89% of total Colombian exports in 2014 and 9.92% of mining exports according to figures from the DANE2 and the DIAN,3 calculated by the Mining/Energy Planning Unit (UPME), (MinIsterio de Minas y Energía, 2015).
Of the 26 departments that produce gold and silver in the country, Santander occupied eighth (8th) place up until 2008, with a participation of 0.2% of the national total. A report by Ingeominas for the same year (2008), claims that 71.3% (63.135 g) of the 88.5504 g of these minerals (gold and silver) produced in Santander is extracted in the municipalities of Vetas y California. With respect to employment, it is estimated that 4500 people are directly employed in this activity. Current statistics for gold and silver production in the country are not reliable due to the existence of a parallel market which primarily serves jewelry workshops and small smelters, as well as the reticence of the mining companies to share data. This makes it difficult to come up with a real figure.
In the region of Santander and Northern Santander, great mineral wealth can be found in the form of gold and silver. At the same time, this region known as the Santurban Moorland is of supreme importance for the preservation of fauna and flora, and people. The Santurban Moorland is the richest zone of flora, fauna and headwaters in all of Colombia; at the same time 60,000 of the 95,000 hectares that comprise it abound in gold, silver and other commercially valuable metals, which makes it very attractive and susceptible to mining exploitation. There are 80 lakes and headwaters which feed the main rivers of Northern Santander such as the Rivers Zulia, Pamplonita and Sardinata, and the rivers that provide water to Bucaramanga, its metropolitan area and 20 other municipalities start there too.
According to the Humboldt Institute (2009) ‘‘. . . this region is the habitat for 457 plant species, 201 bird species, 58 mammal species, 17 amphibian species and 17 reptile species. It is worth noting that a number of these species are threatened with extinction. In Northern Santander, deforestation has been accelerated by anthropogenic intervention (human intervention) with possible deleterious effects on the water bodies that begin there, thus disturbing the communities that develop there. . . ’’ However, this entire ecosystem is affected by mining exploitation carried out there. Thanks to the group of activities related to exploration, and extracting minerals (gold, silver or copper) below the earth’s surface, a chain of environmental problems and pollution is triggered for one of the most important mineral resources for conserving life, the water. The impacts generated by the mining extraction of these metal minerals can vary according the type of materials used and what is being extracted. However, whatever the method used, the environmental impacts are irreversible because non-renewable resource are being exploited using processes that created destruction and pollution.
In their natural state, all these metal minerals are found in amalgams with diverse chemical elements. On some occasions it is possible to find significant deposits of gold and silver which make it possible to generate economic benefits. Regardless of the type of mining practiced, be it subterranean Estudios Mineros del Perú S.A.C, (2006), open-cast (Piscoya Arbanil, 2011) or leaching (Miranda, 2003), it is necessary to use different chemicals such as sulfuric acid, mercury, cyanide, sodium, among others. Independent of which element or mixture is used, it has been shown that these elements are highly polluting to water and the environment in general (Folchi, 2001). In addition to these solutions, they also transport heavy metals such as cadmium, meaning that surface and ground water are also contaminated.
This exploitation is carried out by individuals (natural persons) and companies (legal persons). When it is carried out by individuals, it is usually artisanal mining which due to its informal nature and impact could generate more contamination.
On the other hand there are the legal persons, which due to their greater presence and technical norms, affect the ecosystem to a lesser degree although there will still be negative environmental impacts anyway. This is in contrast with the social impact that they can generate since, according to a complementary study carried out by Biocolombia and CDMB4 (Fundación Biocolombia, 2012), it is estimated that up to 95% of the inhabitants in the municipality of Vetas, and a lesser yet still significant percentage of the inhabitants of the California, relate to some mining company.
It becomes important to take a sustainable development approach where the three dimensions of environment, the social component and the economic component (the last two of which are closely linked) come together (Soto and Rascón, 2012; Fernández and Gutiérrez, 2013). In this sense it is crucial to apply ethical, financial, and community principles, including that of Corporate Social Responsibility, as tools for achieving balance amongst stakeholders (García, 2011), as well as create tools for achieving viability and sustainability in these mining zones (Gómez Santrich and León Saavedra, 2012).
Using a descriptive approach, a profile for Corporate Social Responsibility in Mining Companies that carry out silver and gold exploration and extraction in the Santurban Moorland is presented. Using a holistic and systematic starting point which integrates the ontological, axiological and epistemological with praxis, a diversity of dimensions and actions has been taken into account with an eye to reach optimum levels for all stakeholders in the search for sustainable development (Bédard, 2003).
2 DANE = Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadísticas, in other words the National Statistics Bureau for Colombia. 3 DIAN = Dirección de Impuestos y Aduanas Nacionales de Colombia, or the National Customs and Tax Bureau. 4 CDMB = Corporación Autónoma Regional para la Defensa de la Meseta de Bucaramanga (the Autonomous Regional Corporation for defending the
Bucaramanga Plateau).

J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35

Table 1 Mining companies present in the Santurban Moorland with more than 10 employees. Source: Bucaramanga Chamber of Commerce—August 2012.

Trade name

City

Eco Oro Minerals Corp Sucursal Colombia AUX Colombia Limitada Empresa Minera Reina De ORO Limitada Sociedad Minera La Providencia Limitada Sociedad Minera La Providencia Limitada Minera Potosí Limitada

Bucaramanga Bucaramanga Bucaramanga Bucaramanga Bucaramanga Bucaramanga

27

2. Analysis
2.1. Methodology
The focus of this research is quantitative and the type of research is analytical (Malhotra et al., 2004; Garcia Ferrer, 2005) given that it allows for enquiring and collecting information from companies involved in mining exploitation in the Santurban Moorland. The analytical nature of the research allowed for making inferences about the corporate social responsibility practices carried out by mining companies in this geographic zone. The surveys and information collected enabled the organization and evaluation of concepts that should be taken into account with respect to CSR in this area. It was possible to explore, probe and analyze information from the field and those directly responsible for applying corporate social responsibility, using this type of research. The information was used to carry out a diagnosis of corporate social responsibility and then define an actual profile of it in these companies.
The four stages that were realized are described below to shed more light on how the study was successfully drawn to a close:
Stage 1: Scientific literature review related to Corporate Social Responsibility in the field of business administration. The analysis of successful cases of corporate social responsibility at a national and international level. Secondary information about the sector and corporate social responsibility.
Stage 2: Definition of evaluation variables for corporate social responsibility. Design and validation of an assessment instrument for corporate social responsibility based on the foci of the stakeholders.
Stage 3: Collection of primary data and situational analysis of the sector, in which the strengths and weaknesses of mining companies in the Santurban Moorland with respect to corporate social responsibility. The assessment was focused on an analysis of the different stakeholders relating to corporate social responsibility, and was developed using a structured questionnaire which was applied to the managers of the mining companies.
Stage 4. A CSR profile was established for mining companies in the Santurban Moorland through a taxonomic and multivariate analysis using NTSYS pc.
2.2. Population
The subjects of the study were mining companies with a presence in the Santurban Moorland, which were active as of December 2013 according to the Bucaramanga Chamber of Commerce, and which have more than 10 employees. As a result, it was not necessary to use a sampling technique but rather a census. The participating companies are described in Table 1.
2.3. Results
2.3.1. Literature review In recent years the topic of corporate social responsibility has been developing to such a degree that different authors
have been able to probe the history and development of this business theme. As a result, today it is possible to find an extensive bibliography covering how CSR started as a philanthropic concern that involves all interested parties today, in which there is an attempt to explain the interaction and sustainable development of companies with the environment without affecting interest groups or stakeholders. It would be confusing to try to establish the exact textual origins of corporate social responsibility, but throughout history diverse happenings have contributed to the consolidation of CSR. A document by Ramiro and Pulido (2009) can be cited which helps to understand the chronology of the precedents and origins of CSR through an analysis of corporate social responsibility in transnational companies located in Colombia (Ramiro and Pulido, 2009).
What follows is a detailed explanation of the historical evolution of CSR as shown in Fig. 1. After reviewing the very general historical background of corporate social responsibility shown in Fig. 1, it can be seen that today it is a field with a more integrated focus towards the interior of the organization, and not just a question of mere philanthropy, ethics or management. Now it is a question of integrating all the commercial dimensions with the goal of

28 J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35
Fig. 1. The evolution of corporate social responsibility. Source: Author.
sustainable development in mind. As a result, a paradigm shift is required in all spheres of the company because corporate social responsibility becomes and effective alternative, not just one that permits the mitigation of negative impacts caused by its trade, but also one that generates value added that is shared with all the stakeholders, meaning it becomes reflected in society in general, thus significantly contributing to sustainable development (Quazi and O’Brien, 2000).
However, this holistic focus which has provided sense to corporate social responsibility has been thanks to the development of diverse scientific theories that have allowed it to consolidate as a mega trend in commercial management.

J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35

29

The aim of these theories is to shape the practice of corporate social responsibility and the way in which it influences commercial behavior and development when it is applied (Carroll, 1991; Garriga and Melé, 2004; Porter and Kramer, 2002; McWilliams et al., 2006; Joyner and Payne, 2002; Van Marrewijk, 2003; Lantos, 2001; Watson and MacKay, 2003; Wood, 1991; Rivera Rodríguez and Malaver Rojas, 2011).
Following an exhaustive scientific literature review on corporate social responsibility, it is possible to infer that the most rigorous, prolific and complete authors on the topic have been Carroll (1991), Lantos (2001) and Garriga and Melé (2004). Carroll (1991) presents and groups corporate social responsibility into 4 categories. Economic type responsibilities meet three objectives simultaneously; they provide quality goods to clients, generate dignified employment with quality of life, and finally increase the profits for shareholders. The second category is that of legal responsibilities with a focus of complying with legal norms and government decrees related to commercial activity. Then comes ethical responsibility, which is based on commercial morality with the goal of guiding correct, equitable and just behavior towards the other stakeholders. Finally comes the philanthropic responsibility with a focus on voluntarily and altruistically improving society through one off actions such as donations and social investment.
Following this, Lantos (2001) illustrates corporate social responsibility from four foci of action. The first has a utilitarian focus where generating profits is the sole purpose of business, while meeting the established operating norms for its business activity. The second focus is the generation of profit within circumscribed limits where, in addition to complying with the law, the norms for the setting are respected. The third focus is that of social well-being, which is made manifest when the business manages negative externalities, taking into account the impact on stakeholders and using them as a reference group for decision-making. The fourth focus strategically generates social benefits whereby the business must use resources efficiently as part of their commitment to being of service to the community.
Finally, Garriga and Melé (2004) speak of four types of theories of corporate social responsibility: the theories related to what are called instrumental benefits; those related to political action known as political theories; those that respond to social demands and known as comprehensive/inclusive theories; and finally ethical theories which relate to ethical values.
After an analysis of these authors, it becomes clear that corporate social responsibility is not just another business theory, but rather a business philosophy grounded in ethical concepts with theoretical and scientific bases from which strategies, action plans and everything else are extrapolated with the goal of generating sustainable development for all stakeholders surrounding a business or organization.

2.3.2. Variables and instruments
The next step after carrying out an exhaustive literature review on corporate social responsibility is to define the corporate social responsibility variables that should be evaluated, while taking into account the interest groups and their characteristics. An interest group is any individual that can be affected by, or affect decisions, policies, guidelines and/or the execution of business activities (Weiss, 2006). On this topic Freeman (1984) says that the stakeholders are ‘‘any group or individual who can affect or is affected by the achievement of the organization’s objectives’’ (p. 46). Daft (2005) defines stakeholders as those interested in an organization ‘‘any group within or outside an organization that has a stake in the organization’s performance’’ (p. 147). For this reason, stakeholders are fundamental in the development of corporate social responsibility given that they are directly affected by the development or not of these activities. According to Cortina (1994), we can classify stakeholders as internal, such as partners, shareholder, managers and workers; or external, such as clients, suppliers, competitors and the community at large. Using Cortina’a (1994) stakeholder classification and the domains of CSR (Economic, Environmental and Social), it is possible to define the following internal and external stakeholders for the sector:
Internal: Workers and collaborators: The objective of the organization is to provide the necessary tools that make professional and
personal development possible for each worker, thus guaranteeing a better quality of life. Shareholders: The shareholder objective is to guarantee transparency and make socially responsible investments while
at the same time establishing just and concerted rules of the game and ensuring their compliance.
External: Clients: The mining sector seeks to satisfy customer needs by delivering high quality products and services framed within
their business model, and provide security as well as respect for the environment. Suppliers: The sector looks for suppliers that are not static, and always looking for a win–win relationship that guarantees
quality and service through the use of an integrated management system. Community: in this aspect, the mining sector seeks to promote economic, social and environmental development in
the communities where it operates. This includes health, security, energy conservation, social donations and community relationships.
Referring to Carroll (1991), Lantos (2001), Garriga and Melé (2004), ISO (2010), and (Comisión De Las Comunidades Europeas, 2001), as well as taking the stakeholders into account, the following variables are defined in Fig. 2.
Based on these variables, an assessment instrument consisting of 5 sections with a total of 82 questions was designed, constructed and validated as indicated in Table 2.
The instrument was validated by testing a pilot with two companies, following which it was approved and the field work was carried out with the seven mining companies present in the Santurban Moorland. A census was applied based on 82

30 J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35

Fig. 2. CSR variables. Source: Author.

Table 2 Distribution of questions according to stakeholder groups. Source: Author.

Type of question

Number of questions

General Employees Community Clients Investors Suppliers
Total

4 19 15 17 19
8
82

variables in 6 planes related to corporate social responsibility and the stakeholders. Information was collected between June of 2013 and May of 2014 using a census that was applied only to those mining companies with current registrations in the Bucaramanga Chamber of Commerce and with more than 10 employees each.

2.3.3. Corporate social responsibility of the mining companies present in the Santurban Moorland
In order to establish a corporate social responsibility profile for the mining companies in the Santurban Moorland, two phases were necessary. The initial phase consisted of an assessment in accordance with the method of evaluating the level and typology of CSR. The second phase was carried out via a multivariate analysis (using NtSys) at the level of CSR foci and actions.

J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35

31

a. Assessment of CSR Practices The assessment of corporate social responsibility practices was carried out using information collected by Morales et al. (2013) through applying and resolution of the assessment instrument by management in 6 companies that have operations in the Santurban Moorland.
– CSR actions At a general level it was possible to infer that 83% have a CSR policy or strategy, which indicates that great interest exists
at a sector level to generate plan and models for awareness raising with respect to corporate social responsibility. Despite this, only 33% have a position dedicated to designing and executing tasks directly related to the topic. On the other hand, 67% of the companies manifested that among the barriers encountered in achieving adequate CSR management was a lack of knowledge on the topic, and the other 33% said that it was due to lack of allies and cooperation in executing the said actions. With respect to the impact that CSR can generate, the firms acknowledged that carrying out CSR actions results in a positive position area while also creating value for shareholders.
– Employees The analysis for this stakeholder group seeks to evaluate CSR actions in the mining sector with respect to salary, hiring,
well-being and equality which are considered to be the pillars of responsible labor practices (Romero Zanguña, 2012; Gallhofer et al., 2011). At present, a fundamental factor at the employee level, is the selection process, and within this process the equality criteria, given that we find ourselves within a diverse, versatile and borderless society thanks to globalization. For this reason, companies should guarantee zero discrimination through guaranteeing the hiring of the perfect person for the job without making any type of differentiation. Mining companies in the Santurban Moorland highlight that they are unable to apply two of the equality criteria, those of age and disability, due to the diverse tasks that mining incurs. Looking at the selection process we find that 57% of companies claim to use internal calls to fill vacancies and 25% use external announcements or other methods.
Another key factor is salary, and 100% of the companies claim that gender equity exists in salary earnings. Continuing with the analysis it was found that in additional benefits beyond those required by law, 46% provide vacation pay, 39% pay a Christmas bonus, and only 15% provide educational subsidies, even though some companies show an interest in selfimprovement and personal and professional growth for their employees. Precisely with respect to this aspect, it was found that they provide support to their workers for professional development by allowing flexible work hours and permissions to accommodate hours for studying (28%). Only one company reported only using one activity, which is giving time off to attend classes. Both ongoing training and educational subsidies are provided by 22% of the companies. This turns into something attractive for workers and increases their well-being. It also shows interest on the part of the companies in the professional growth of their staff; of course, they know that this can lead to company growth too.
Motivation plans that are most used (67%) by companies surveyed in the mining sector in the Santurban Moorland are financial rewards and prizes. These are followed by promotions. All the companies surveyed have some minimal motivation plan for the workers, demonstrating an interest in the well-being of their workers.
As part of the general well-being of the workers, all the companies comply with the basic workplace health and safety norm required by law, such as having an occupational health and safety committee, and an occupational health program, but go no further to consolidate a SISO management system or some similar scheme which can guarantee excellent management on this theme. Continuing with employees, it was evidenced that half the companies surveyed do not prepare their workers for leaving either due to completing their contract or due to retirement. This can have psychosocial impacts for employees when they leave the company. Finally, on the philanthropic level, companies do not promote voluntary service by employees, and a small percentage make donations to some social programs.
– Community The community is composed of different participants, each of which carries out its role and is affected in one way
or another by the development of commercial activities. This interest group is the core objective of corporate social responsibility, since these activities carried out by the business enables the community to be known and supported, and for balanced development to be generated that has an improving impact on the setting. It is clear from the analysis of the data collected that the mining sector in the Santurban Moorland is not clear on how to develop actions that show an improvement in quality of life and the environment. This variable is centered on two key aspects: social investment and environmental action.
With respect to social investment, each company invests in programs that to some degree contribute to development, but the impact is small when an attempt is made to measure the effect on quality of life. When asked the question, ‘‘Which social investment strategies has your company implemented?’’ companies responded that they support sport (32%), they support cultural activities (26%) and education (32%). Investments for environmental improvement can be found in last place (20%). In reality, this is a very low number considering the scale and environmental impact caused by mining in the different zones where it takes place. In order to carry out their activities, 83% of the companies say that they build public–private alliances which significantly augment the investment made.
Companies were probed to discover how they identify community needs. It was found that different companies use different methods and that some do not even do this. Among the methods found were interviews with community leaders (33%), population surveys (17%), direct observation (33%) and the other 17% do not identify community needs. All this serves to show that a clear and precise methodology for identifying real needs in the surrounding community does not exist, and

32 J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35
as such, social investment actions are not able to make a significant impact on the environment and quality of life of the population. When asked about support for self-sustaining activities, only 50% of the companies said that they promote this activity through art and skills training.
When looking at the environmental aspect, 33% of the companies focus on conserving resources and natural areas. Another 33% focus on developing programs aimed at clean production and integrated solid waste management. Environmental investments in the zone of influence are made by 83% of the companies. There is still a lot of ground to cover with respect to basic environmental actions given that they continue to include recycling and environmental education as their main element, and which fall short when it comes to adequate environmental management. Another aspect has to do with a rational use of water and energy saving. Only 50% use strategies to promote the development of these actions. This goes to show that they are only just beginning to carry out environmental management.
– Clients Clients are key actors in the socioeconomic dynamic of the companies. With corporate social responsibility, the intention
is that companies know their clients’ needs, improve post sale service, guarantee the quality of their products, and promote environmentally friendly practices through developing and commercializing products, offering fair prices and promoting zero discrimination. These companies replied that in the first place they do not need a customer service department because their main client, and in 50% of the cases, only client is the Central Bank of Colombia. Half (50%) say that they do not communicate directly with their client because it is not required, 33% confirm that they communicate via telephone and e-mail, and 17% have an office or area in charge of PQR’s. When asked about social marketing, they replied that they do not do this since they are not accustomed to using publicity campaigns or other similar elements. Finally, they were asked about certification seals that guarantee the quality of their products. The majority responded that they do not see this as necessary, and 33% manifested that they are implementing a quality management program to get certified. The majority (67%) say that it is not necessary to identify client needs and the other 33% highlight that they do this through a system of relating to clients. When probed about how they measure quality control, they responded that they do not use any statistical tool, but rather evaluate the quality of the gold according to some internal measure. When asked about how they promote zero discrimination with their clients, 83% said they do not do this and 17% said this does not apply to the industry.
Another key aspect that was looked at was protection policies for people who could be affected by their products. Only 17% say that they have these policies, while 83% say that they do not have them and that they do not apply since everyone in the region works in the trade. This statistic is rather alarming because it needs to be remembered that various elements and chemical materials are used in gold and silver mining that are highly polluting and toxic. This is a clear failing on the part of these companies.
– Investors Investors are one of the key stakeholders if corporate social responsibility is to function effectively. This interest group
is charged with providing guidelines that establish the foundation of ethical and transparent governance which contribute to maintaining or increasing investment in the company in such a way that it contributes to societal development.
The first aspect to be evaluated at this level is the perception that they hold with respect to CSR as a business strategy. Investors responded positively in 67% of the cases, while 33% did not consider it to be as such.
Consequently, 83% of the companies include aspects of CSR in their strategic planning such as anti-corruption strategies. Companies use a variety of actions to combat corruption: self-control (50%), internal auditing procedures and increased transparency (33%), and the rest (17%) did not specify. Investors also make use of a viability measure that they apply quarterly (67%) or annually (33%). When asked about what percentage of the budget should be invested in CSR, all the companies responded differently, but it can be said that the amount vacillated between 0% and 2% of the company’s budget. Another crucial aspect for investors is accountability for which the companies generally use shareholder meetings, as well as portfolio reports, the Web, and finally publishing management indicators. Last but not least, given the nature of the industry, comes the investment of royalties report. Even though all the companies pay royalties, only 33% demand a report on how the royalties have been invested.
– Suppliers For this stakeholder group, it was necessary to evaluate various aspects that have to do with the relationship between the
company and its suppliers with an eye to ensuring stability between the company and the suppliers. These include selection criteria, payment conditions, and evaluating fair and competitive practices. The purpose is to cement an ethical structure that can ensure competitiveness and development of the whole business sector. In addition, the company should promote and contribute to the suppliers developing CSR actions in their operations.
The first aspect looked at in this sphere is the call for suppliers. Analysis of the data reveals that the process most used by companies in the mining sector in the Santurban Moorland is direct contact with suppliers and requesting quotes, while a small percentage combine strategies or opt for public tender. Half the companies in the mining sector in the Santurban Moorland select suppliers using questionnaires, followed by portfolio analysis. It is not clear what evaluation process is used to evaluate suppliers because the majority say they use their own internal methods, none of which include assigning scores, an evaluation committee, or a management assessment. In addition, 50% of the companies do not know if their suppliers carry out CSR related activities. All the companies were found to pay suppliers on credit within 30 to 90 days. Finally, it was found that the companies have no process for approaching suppliers.

J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35

33

Fig. 3. Correspondence analysis for companies. Source: Author.
b. CSR Profiles A correspondence analysis of level and company variables was carried out in order to establish the corporate social
responsibility profiles, the results of which are demonstrated in Figs. 3 and 4. Using the results obtained from the correspondence analysis, the results of which are shown in Fig. 3, it is possible to infer that the business identifiers for mining companies show a high degree of dispersion. This means that mining companies undertake independent actions to the degree that a specific sector orientation towards CSR cannot be defined that can inform the future. Given the nature of the sector, the type of population involved and the impact on society, some minimum standards for applying corporate social responsibility should exist.
All of this leads us to establish defined cluster strategies for the sector. The concurrency analysis is shown in Fig. 4. Here it can also be seen that there is great dispersion even though there are some vectors that attempt to establish a tendency although statistically concurrency cannot be shown to exist. What this shows is that there is no clear CSR benchmark in the sector and that each company develops a variety of activities which generally do not coincide with those developed by the other companies.
3. Conclusions
In general it can be said that the mining companies in the Santurban Moorland have a CSR policy or strategy, and they expect it to contribute to their business in a positive way in that it will be reflected in the growth and well-being of the stakeholders.
When looking at employee stakeholders, it was found that there is no clear process for selecting personnel. There are also no programs directed towards female employees with small children. Despite these weaknesses, they do have agreements that go beyond the letter of the law, gender equity with respect to salaries and promotion, support for the professional development of the employees, clear policies against child labor, and incentive packages.
With respect to the community, it was found that companies do not have sufficient tools at their disposal to be able to identify the needs in the closest communities. They do practice social investment but the impact on social development in the region cannot be established. In addition, there is no evidence of attempts to use cleaner production methods or mitigation efforts with respect to the impact on development in the surrounding area.
With respect to investment, it was found that there are mechanisms for avoiding corruption, although they are not necessarily the most effective. Shareholders do hold a positive attitude towards CSR.

34 J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35
Fig. 4. Correspondence analysis of multiple variables. Source: Author.
There is no structured procedure for selecting, contracting and evaluating suppliers. There is a lack of interest in evaluating the quality of supplier products and whether they practice corporate social responsibility. In addition, the companies do not have programs for approaching suppliers.
The weakest dimension is that of the clients. The first deficiency found is that companies do not have an internal nor external client service department. They do not give any follow-up to PQR’s among other things. There is very little interest in this sector for taking the client into account given that they are few and far between; the great majority are very large companies and the government in the form of the central bank. They also claim that they have no protection or contingency programs for their internal clients whom are most affected by their activities that use chemicals necessary to the extractions.
It is not possible to come up with a clear CSR profile for the sector. Each company has its own policies and actions that they carry out in distinct ways. The sector has not adopted a clear benchmark for developing corporate social responsibility which directly influences the impact that it has on society. Uncoordinated actions are not apt to generate social, economic and environmental development because they do not follow a logic and systematic order that can compensate for the negative aspects generated by mining exploitation.
References
Bédard, R., 2003. Los fundamentos del Pensamiento y las Prácticas Administrativas. Ad-Minister 80–109. Carroll, A.B., 1991. The pyramid of corporate social responsibility: Toward the moral management of organizational stakeholders. Bus. Horiz. 34 (4), 39–48. Comisión De Las Comunidades Europeas, 2001. LIBRO VERDE Fomentar un marco europeo para la responsabilidad social de las empresas. Union Europea,
Bruselas. Cortina, A., 1994. Ética de la empresa: Claves para una nueva cultura empresarial, third ed., Madrid, Trotta. Daft, R.L., 2005. Teoría y Diseño Organizacional, ninth ed. CENGAGE Learning, México. Estudios Mineros del Perú SAC, 2006. Manual de Minería. Lima, Estudios Mineros del Perú SAC, Perú. Fernández, L., Gutiérrez, M., 2013. Bienestar social, Económico y Ambiental para las Presentes y Futuras Generaciones. Inform. Tecn. 24 (2), 121–130. Folchi, M., 2001. Conflictos de contenido ambiental y ecologismo de los pobres: no siempre pobres, ni siempre ecologistas. Ecol. Polít. 22 (22), 79–100. Freeman, E., 1984. Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach. MA Pittman, Boston. Fundación Biocolombia, 2012. Estudio para la Declaración de un Área Natural Protegida en La Región de Santurbán. Recuperado el 05 de Julio de 2013, de
PROYECTOS: http://fundacionbiocolombia.org/santurban.php. Gallhofer, S., Haslam, J., Walt, S.v., 2011. Accountability and transparency in relation to human rights: A critical perspective reflecting upon accounting,
corporate responsibility and ways forward in the context of globalisation. Crit. Perspect. Account. 22 (8), 765–780. García, M., 2011. La responsabilidad social empresarial y las finanzas. Cuadernos De Administración [serial online], pp. 41–54. Garcia Ferrer, G., 2005. In: Carlos, U.R. (Ed.), Investigación Comercial, second ed. Esic Editorial, Madrid, España, Torrejón de Ardoz. Garriga, E., Melé, D., 2004. Corporate social responsibility theories: mapping the territory. J. Bus. Ethics 53 (1–2), 51–71. Gómez Santrich, M.E., León Saavedra, J.C., 2012. Acerca de la sustentabilidad y la racionalidad ambiental: el diálogo como fuente de cambio en la acción
empresarial. Rev. Fac. Cienc. Econ.: Invest. Y Reflex. 20 (2), 81–95. ISO, 2010. 26000. Suiza: ISO.

J.D. Morales Méndez, R.S. Rodríguez / Global Ecology and Conservation 6 (2016) 25–35

35

Joyner, B.E., Payne, D., 2002. Evolution and implementation: a study of values, business ethics. J. Bus. Ethics 41 (4), 297–311. Lantos, G.P., 2001. The boundaries of strategic corporate social responsibility. J. Consum. Mark. 18 (7), 595–630. Malhotra, N.K., Dávila Martínez, J., Treviño Rosales, M.E., 2004. Investigación de Mercados. Pearson Educación, México. Martinez Ortiz, A., Aguilar, T., 30 de Abril de 2012. Impacto socioeconomico de la minería en Colombía. (FEDESARROLLO, Ed.) Recuperado el 24 de Junio
de 2013, de FEDESARROLLO: http://www.fedesarrollo.org.co/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/Impacto-socioecon%C3%B3mico-de-la-miner%C3%ADa-enColombia-Informe_Impacto_de_la_miner%C3%ADa_Final-26-abril.pdf. McWilliams, A., Siegel, D.S., Wright, P.M., 2006. Corporate social responsibility: Strategic implications. J. Manag. Stud. 43 (1), 1–18. MinIsterio de Minas y Energía, 2015. Análisis de las exportaciones mineras 2014. Bogotá, DC. Ministerio de Minas y Energía. Miranda, L.J.J., 2003. Cronología de los antecedentes históricos de la explotación de los yacimientos lateríticos por la tecnología de lixiviación ácida a presión (LAP). Rev. Cubana Quím. 3–19. Morales, J., Méndez, F., Cardona, D.C., 2013. Modelo de rse para el paramo de santurban, Universidad Manuela Beltran, Bucaramanga. Piscoya Arbanil, J.A., 2011. Minería y contaminación ambiental en Piura. Revista ECIPerú, pp. 238–244. Porter, M.E., Kramer, M.R., 2002. The competitive advantage of corporate philanthropy. Harv. Bus. Rev. 80 (12), 5–16. Quazi, A.M., O’Brien, D., 2000. An empirical test of a cross-national model of Corporate Social. J. Bus. Ethics (25), 33–51. Ramiro, P., Pulido, A., 2009. Las multinacionales españolas y el negocio de la responsabilidad. Análisis de la Responsabilidad Social Corporativa de las empresas transnacionales en Colombia. Observatorio de Multinacionales en América Latina (OMAL), Bogotá. Rivera Rodríguez, H.A., Malaver Rojas, M.N., 2011. La organización: los stakeholders y la responsabilidad social. Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá. Romero Zanguña, M., 2012. Flexibilización laboral y ética empresarial. Rev. Derecho 37, 321–349. Soto, R., Rascón, O., 2012. Desarrollo sostenible (semblanza histórica). Revista Del Centro De Investigación. Universidad La Salle [serial online], pp. 101–122. Van Marrewijk, M., 2003. Concepts and definitions of CSR and corporate sustainability: between. J. Bus. Ethics 44 (2), 95–105. Watson, M., MacKay, J., 2003. Auditing for the environment. Manag. Audit. J. 18 (8), 625–630.
Weiss, J.W., 2006. Ética en los Negocios: Un Enfoque de Administración de los Stakeholders y de Casos, fourth ed. Thomson, México, DF. Wood, D.J., 1991. Social issues in management: Theory and research in corporate social. J. Manag. 17 (2), 383–406.

